MRND [National Revolutionary Development Movement] militants, the fourth ordinary congress of the MRND decided to reelect me to head our movement and as a presidential candidate according to our constitution.

I wish to present to you the program which my government with the help of each Rwandan will try to implement in the interests of every Rwandan. The world economic crisis and its impact on our country's economy and its problems impel me to regard the new government’s program in the context of austerity and dialogue. 1 say austerity, because we cannot afford to live beyond our means ~ means which are limited. Accordingly, our resources must be managed with care and efficiency by eliminating waste wherever possible, avoiding duplication of effort and sacking such incompetents as may remain in the public services and parastatals.

By austerity, I also mean that people must discharge their responsibilities at all levels in conformity with directives issued, by constantly promoting the common good, by not ignoring their responsibilities, by not misinterpreting directives, and by not failing to attend administrative council meetings. And by austerity, 1 also mean honesty in management.

Dialogue must always go hand in hand with austerity. In the past, and despite my repeated exhortations, some authorities have failed to realize the extent to which the success of their efforts depends on dialogue with those who also have something to say in decision-making processes.

The credibility attained by the Rwandan people must not be affected. Each one of us must understand that his mission is to work for the common good, and it is important that our objectives be clearly defined, that our means be clearly identified, and that the. activities of enterprises be clear enough to be checked. It is more important than ever before that our means be geared to our objectives. We must ensure that the government's budget reflects the true priorities of the government's policy.

MRND militants, the Ministry of Finance and Economy will coordinate all matters relating to Financial policy; that is, budget, trade and loans. These three areas constitute an organic entity. This ministry will from now on be responsible for harmonizing our economic policies, which will thus better reflect the philosophy of our liberal plans. That is to say, the government encourages free enterprise and the development of private initiatives in a favorable framework compatible with Rwanda's national interests. It will also be responsible for the effective management of the economy and the money supply, as well as for the stability of the economy — an essential condition for true self-reliance. The priority of the department will be to achieve a balanced budget as directed by the Constitution.

The participation of the state in various economic and social areas over the last 4 years has resulted in a significant increase in public expenditures, which has exceeded our income during the period. The world economic crisis has also worsened the state of public funds in terms of foreign exchange. Facing such a situation, the government must adopt austerity measures aimed at reestablishing the balance necessary for good economic management, as laid down in the constitution.

First of all, it means that the government must adopt an austerity policy aimed at cutting expenditures and avoiding waste. To this end, all departments are called upon scrupulously to respect regulations relating to public funds and also the various rules of the Ministry of Finance and Economy in terms of budget management. It is therefore reaffirmed that no expenditures may be embarked upon without the prior authorization of the general inspector of finance. Financially independent organizations must also respect the budget adopted by the higher authorities.

While drafting and adopting budget, the higher authorities must cut down on some items. It is to be noted that expenditures on personnel represents almost two-thirds of the ordinary budget. In order to contain this situation, new appointments must be restricted and the inefficient sacked. The state of our public funds also obliges us to reduce expenditures on equipment and transport. Those in charge in those sectors must ensure that maintenance and fuel expenses do not exceed allocations.

The Ministry of Industry, Mines and Crafts will control everything connected with local industry in Rwanda, that is, agriculture, mining, crafts, and all industrial projects. This grouping will help in introducing the necessary coherence in order to harmonize our efforts in industrialization areas, eliminate duplicate efforts and work out methods relevant to the needs and aspirations of our country.

Militants, the government's first priority will be food. The Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Forests will be priority responsible for matters relating to the food strategy. That is food self-sufficiency for the people of Rwanda.
