I was in fact disappointed going to Gisenyi because, as acting president of CEPGL, I believed the convention would be ratified during my mandate, Since we have fallen behind the deadline for the agreement to take effect, that is January 1987, we insisted in Bujumbura in January 1988 on the necessity of ratification. You heard the language used in Gisenyi and the insistence on reciprocal security: I noted a climate tainted almost with mistrust. Nevertheless, the heads of state made solemn and public pledges. 1 therefore hope the convention will be ratified at the next summit.

It is the backbone of integration of our subregion. But all possible steps must be taken to avoid treading on the sore spots of one side or another.

I sent emissaries to both countries. I was informed by Zaire that the convention must make it through several political bodies, notably the Central Committee and the Parliament. And President Mobutu assured me that the process would be complete in March. As far as Burundi is concerned, the minister of foreign affairs, Cyprien Mbonimpa, in his official statement in Gisenyi, referred to the Ntega and Marangara incidents to explain his reticence. President Pierre Buyoya likewise mentioned them in his banquet allocution. Thus, there is some suspicion. According to the first version of these events, the instigators came from outside Burundi, a version which we do not at all share. It’s probably true that there were tracts—what country doesn't have tracts—or even rumors coming from outside. But to believe that that is the cause of the incidents is a fundamental mistake. The problem is internal and President Buyoya is aware of it since he is now engaged in the process of shoring up national unity. He has also created a commission to reflect on the question. All these insinuations, therefore, in my opinion must be taken as such. Nevertheless we agreed that our security services would meet periodically and seek in a very concrete way means of strengthening security between our countries.

I have not compared figures.

I was shown a not very in-depth study on the infrastructures and investments made in the three territories. But since we founded CEPGL in 1976 and decided to install it in Rwanda, we haven’t gotten anything more, it’s true.

No, we maintain productive, cooperative relations with Belgium. The deterioration in the relations between Belgium and Zaire does not in any way disturb our relations with Belgium. What does disturb us is that two countries who are our friends are at odds.

No, because it’s not at that stage! I don't imagine that Belgium will attack Zaire or vice versa! I don’t know whether that was what was implied, but since we talked about intra-CEPGL security, it was normal to touch on its extension outside [of the CEPGL]. Concerning the support to be given Zaire, I think that certain truths are inescapable in the discussions between our neighbor and Belgium: in cooperative matters, when a country provides aid, it is also profitable for that country. There is no reason for conflict, one must simply draw the necessary conclusions in order to recement ties on new bases.

Its mission is to study all the questions facing Rwandans living abroad—and that doesn't concern refugees only. The case of the latter is certainly the most poignant and sensitive. The commission’s task will therefore be to resolve all these questions in concert with all interested parties: neighboring countries, which shelter the refugees and in some cases grant them citizenship. We are prepared to receive them, with or without foreign citizenship, but we don’t claim they can come live here. Our position on this subject is known. Rwanda is an overpopulated country, there isn’t a single square centimeter free. Where would you have us put new arrivals when we are negotiating with neighboring countries to allow emigration of Rwandans living in Rwanda? It would be contradictory. The commission was therefore created so that neighboring countries and the international community would understand our position. If we are mistaken, they will tell us, if we are right, they will help us find solutions. That said, I have heard of one or another countries that called for its refugees to return home. But situations are not comparable from one country to another. Some of them, unlike us, do not lack land. Before colonization, Rwanda extended beyond its present borders. Moreover, things are different when you are talking about recent refugees. Imagine someone who left 30 years ago: the land that he occupied alone now holds 10 or 15 families. In the meantime, he has founded a large family himself. You see the complications.

I don't know. Obviously there is international law, according to which a refugee remains a refugee. But all the same, laws are made for and by men. After 30 years, the sons and grandsons of refugees are nationals, or at least they should be.

That is all very good, but if there are 100 of us in a small room and 50 people outside want to come in, all we can tell them is: you have the right, but there is no room!

Listen, each country has its problems. Rwanda has its own and I suppose you know the history of our country. We had a monarchy based on a single ethnic group. We overturned it in 1959. To avoid reverting to that situation, we decided on a policy of equilibrium. We had to share, and thus to make calculations. If you are 14 percent, you will have 14 percent of the positions. Obviously, mathematics cannot be rigidly applied in human relations, yet basic principles are necessary.

We are criticized for mentioning, on identity cards, Hutu, Tutsi, or Twa ethnicity. Simply doing away with the notation “Hutu” on my identity card does not automatically erase my membership in that ethnic group. To indicate that a particular individual is Hutu does not make him any more Rwandan than another. When your passport says you are blond, blue-eyed, and so many centimeters tall, it's not discrimination: it’s true. In countries where ethnicity is not officially recorded, how is it known, when incidents occur, that so many were killed in this or that ethnic group? Because they are identified anyway. Elsewhere they do not dare record it, we do. And then, it’s an old system; it already existed when my father was born.

But identity cards do not only give ethnic group membership! Besides a description of the holder, his region of origin is indicated. Notation of what you are on your identity card should not bother you. You should be proud of your Tutsi, Hutu, or Twa origin and simply consider yourself a full-fledged Rwandan. That is what we should aim for. If there were injustices, it is the latter sort that would have to be combatted, and not the secondary question of notation of ethnicity as such.

I wake up at 0500 with Radio Rwanda and go to bed around 2100. In between, as you might suspect, I study kilos of dossiers ...

Anything else? With great difficulty. I read correspondence, dossiers, technical documents on a multitude of sectors; one becomes a jack-of-all-trades in the long run.

I am Catholic as were my parents; I was baptized when I was 8 days old and go to mass regularly with my family.

I very rarely take vacations. Sometimes, when I need rest. I arrange a week off for myself which I spend inside the country. But the telephone does not give me much respite. Twice I enjoyed myself vacationing in Greece, in remembrance of the Greece of antiquity which I encountered as a student. I stayed 2 weeks each time: Rwandans were not happy

It's the emblem of our party, the MRND (National Revolutionary Development Movement). It's not my idea and something else could perhaps have been found. I know that wearing the likeness of a leader can look like a personality cult. I don’t think that’s the case. In any event. I’m watching out for it.

As far as the film is concerned, I have heard very positive things. My daughter, who is studying in France, phoned me to express her enthusiasm. We are expecting considerable tourist business to result.

That said, we are astonished to hear that Dian Fossey was supposedly killed by poachers in murky circumstances. Yet Rwandan judicial authorities know that Dian Fossey was killed by another American researcher whose name is known. Rwandan police found in Dian Fossey’s hands blond hairs which were sent to Paris for examination. The results were irrefutable: they were indeed those of the suspect in question, who had already left the country.

Absolutely. We have set up a research outpost with other researchers, including an American, a Belgian, and several Rwandans. It is important that Rwandan citizens take up the baton. Protection of their environment concerns them more than anyone.