Rebels' aim is to restore feudalism; steps taken aimed at defending Rwanda on the diplomatic front; the search for solutions; thanks to Mobutu for moral and military support. Militants, we have in our region strong allies who are also convinced about the rightness of our cause and on whom we can always count. Among our regional allies are obviously also Burundi and Kenya. Buyoya's support since the beginning; Moi and Kenyan ruling party KANU assured us of their support; Museveni's position in favour of peaceful solution and non-violability of borders will help; thanks to Mitterrand on behalf of Rwandan people .

The meetings with interested parties were followed by what we usually call today summits. First, there was the Mwanza summit between Tanzania, Uganda and Rwanda, and the Gbadolite summit between Zaire, Burundi and Rwanda.

The two summits in fact had the same aim to do everything possible to achieve a rapid return of peace in Rwanda. This return to peace was first and foremost to start with an end to the bloodshed and the destruction of our country. It was thus to begin with a cease-fire followed by the establishment of an interposition force along the Uganda-Rwanda border, with the negotiations on long-term solutions to the Rwandan refugee problem only to be tackled afterwards.

In this respect, I would like to reiterate the Rwandan government's position it is an open as heard position. We approve the idea of a cease-fire. Rwanda has always been in favour of flexible positions and it will never reject any idea which may allow a rapid and peaceful settlement to be reached. But, nonetheless, for Rwanda there is no question of holding direct negotiations with our aggressors as long as their departure from Rwandan territory does not occur as an integral part of some or other agreement.

On the other hand, we are ready and we reaffirm it today, we are ready to negotiate with all those who have influence over these armed invaders. In fact, it is in this way that Rwanda defines its move a cease-fire followed by the withdrawal of the assailants. The negotiations expected in the framework of permanent solutions to the refugee problem can only take place after the departure of the assailants who - and the world is beginning to be convinced about this - are in no way interested in or motivated by the refugee problem.

The whole Rwandan people would rise as one man if direct negotiations were to be held with these aggressors who put the country to fire and sword while most despicably tarnishing its image as they have done while continuing to shoot at us and illegally to occupy our territory. Rather than giving up a single inch of our territory in response to a fait accompli from these deserters of a foreign army, the Rwandan people - all of us - we will fight to the last man before allowing our country to be destroyed and the return of a feudal, elitist and royalist regime.

Rwanda's position is in accordance with UN charters on external aggression; cease-fire to be followed by withdrawal of aggressors; Rwandan government will spare no efforts to solve the refugee problem; second Gbadolite summit reaffirmed need for cease-fire and neutral peace- keeping force; officials urged to ensure that trade continues without disruption; gratitude to people and Rwanda's friends; expressions of gratitude.