I am pleased to give you the National Synthesis Commission's report. I assessed it myself in the same way as did the majority of Rwandans. After the National Revolutionary Development Movement [MRND] congress, which is to give me authorization, I shall ask you, on the basis of the powers conferred on the National Development Council [CND] by Articles 68 and 91 of the present Constitution, to examine properly and quickly the constitutional amendments as suggested by the National Synthesis Commission so that they may be adapted to today’s realities and to a multi-party system. Therefore, I submit today for your judgement and analysis the draft of the new constitution in order to have it approved at the same time as the political parties laws, which are to accompany the new constitution, following the MRND extraordinary congress.

Militants, we Rwandans have as a primary objective the welfare of the whole population. Let us persevere in that direction, which is the only way to progress and real unity and which is based on our wishes. Continue then to be the high representatives of the people, who, by electing you, had this in mind. Enlighten them and tell them what a political party is. Tell them that a true political party is one which serves them. Explain to them that the goal of the multiparty system is neither hatred nor division. Tell them that a real political party is one which proposes a program aimed at improving their social conditions. I call on you, then, to approve these laws without too much delay. In my opinion, this should be done in such a manner that the legalization of the political parties be started at the beginning of June, 1991. I hope we will all respect this time schedule.

Militants, CND members, by involving ourselves in reforming our political system into a multiparty system, we wanted the process to be founded on the wishes of the majority. The MRND extraordinary congress—the sole authorized political framework until now, in accordance with the Constitution adopted by the population on 17 December 1978—will not hesitate in its turn to approve the terms of the process.

The third group of those who wrote to the commission believed that a referendum would not be necessary, that it was impossible to implement it at a time when our country is facing serious economic problems. Besides, the war imposed on us by our aggressors inflicted specific difficulties on us. We do not even know when it will end. That is why it is impossible to hold a referendum at this time. This third group thinks the CND, in accordance with Article 91 of the Constitution, is authorized to revise the present fundamental in the direction of the expectations of the majority of the population. The CND itself chose this third option. For my part, starting from the fact that the principle reaffirmed in the commission’s report expresses the will of the majority, I consider the third option as the most suitable for the situation prevailing in Rwanda. That is why I support it. It will make easier our duty of political 

The N’sele agreement was to suspend the hostilities, but it appears that some people perhaps are not yet satisfied with the agreement. The population of the regions where the fighting took place now knows the sound of shell fire. They have suffered. They have lost their relatives. We wanted to put an end to this unnecessary carnage, since the cockroaches inyenzi do not control a single portion of the national territory, although they continue to spread lies about this. Those are the rules of the game: The peace initiative obviously falls to the winner.