The truth is that since October 1980 they have invaded Rwanda, starting from Uganda, because they were part of the Uganda Army. We managed to repel them, and we carried out a diplomatic action, first of all with our neighbors, a diplomatic action which led us to a cease-fire. We have done this: The cease-fire was signed in Kinshasa on 29 March thanks to President Mobutu’s mediation. Since then, a group of military observers has been set up, consisting of 15 officers from Burundi, 15 from Uganda, 15 from Zaire, joined by five officers from Rwanda and five officers of the Patriotic Front. It is they who monitor the faithful implementation of the cease-fire.

To prevent the observation groups from being installed, the Patriotic Front has tried to attack us in order to conquer a section of the territory. That is why they violated the cease-fire: To obtain a part of the territory, because they realize that the signing of the cease-fire does not suit them in the least.

Ladies and Gentlemen, members of the diplomatic and consular corps, dear friends of Rwanda: at this closing moment of the MRND extraordinary congress,  I find it very important to tell you how much we have appreciated your presence among us.

Dear friends of Rwanda, our country, Rwanda, is facing tragic circumstances. There is not only the sad war, but all the crises which are befalling us and which mean that Rwanda is facing, today, what is certainly the most critical phase of its existence. I would say, however, that the resources of the Rwandan people are astonishing. Their capacity to resist is impressive; their faith in a better future remains strong. Proof of this is the MRND extraordinary congress, which has legitimized political pluralism in Rwanda. Despite the extraordinarily difficult times Rwanda is going through, nothing has stopped it from moving further ahead, either at the level of economic recovery or in regard to the political reforms which have been planned for over two years, or the initiatives it continues to take in so many areas.

The fact that you have been witnesses to the dynamism of the Rwandan people, whose representatives at the extraordinary congress have adopted important initiatives that will shape the political scenery of our country for future generations, thereby proving their determination to do everything possible to succeed in their development, gives us cause for rejoicing and pride. We thank you for this.

On behalf of the congress delegates gathered here, who represent the entire Rwandan people, and on my own behalf, I request you to convey to your respective people and governments your testimony of the courage and determination of the Rwandan people, who have taken a further step on the path of development and democracy, and who will continue to be worthy of your cooperation. I, therefore, declare finished the work of the MRND extraordinary congress.