Rwandans, my dear compatriots: The adoption by parliament—the National Development Council CND of the draft revised Rwandan Constitution is an event of very great importance for our country. My signing in my capacity as president of the Republic elected by you via universal suffrage of the revised Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda, as provided by law, is largely justified by the fact that our society has entered the multiparty era.

I address all Rwandans to inform them that I am extremely happy today to see Rwanda involving itself in a new political achievement that constitutes the ardent wish of all of us. I also wish to express to my compatriots my thoughts about this exalting promise of a substantial strengthening of our democratic achievements. 

Finally, political pluralism means that weapons are replaced by ballot boxes. It means the peaceful acceptance of differences of opinion. It means the defense of other people’s right to air their views freely, with dignity, even though they may not share the same ideas. Political pluralism is, therefore, the very essence of the Republic.

Convinced that it is important to strengthen an authentically liberal information system, and to promote, as a priority, a professional print media, I propose to invite future political parties, in the reasonably near future, to a consultation aimed at identifying the best formula for providing the national press with the means of enabling it to play its expected role in developing an interdependent multiparty system based on democracy.

I would like to concentrate my final thoughts on some of the immediate and concrete implications resulting from our country's accession to a multiparty era, which will be the case very soon, as soon as the law on political parties is adopted and parties have had time to register themselves. Even though Article 101 of the revised Constitution includes transitional provisions allowing the CND deputies and the president of the Republic to continue carrying out their duties until the next elections, I believe that presidential and legislative elections should not be delayed too much, as the question now is to legitimize the new structures within the best possible time limit which, for obvious reasons, is in our country’s known interest.

That is why, once the new parties are born and have had enough time to become known to the public, I propose, in my capacity as president of the Republic, to whoever will befall the duty of fixing the dates of presidential and legislative elections in accordance with the same Article 101 of the Constitution, to convene consultations between the parties aimed at defining together, in common agreement, the elections timetable which will become necessary due to the revision of the Constitution.