Calm is returning to the Bugesera [southern Rwanda] region. The death toll stands at 35 dead. In his message to the nation yesterday, Prime Minister Dr. Sylvestre Nsanzimana appealed to the population to remain calm and unreservedly condemned the events in Bugesera. Several units of the gendarmerie are on site to help in the total restoration of order.

In his message, the prime minister highlighted a certain number of points in order to avoid the recurrence of what took place in Kanzenze and Gashora communes. Let us listen to an excerpt from the prime minister’s speech yesterday.

Rwandan ladies and gentlemen: In these difficult times our country is going through, we have to pay special attention to some unfortunate events in order to prevent their recurrence. I can cite as an example of such regrettable events the ongoing war at the northern border of our country and the troubles in the commune of Kanzenze.

In order to fight against all these evils, appropriate measures must be taken, notably the following:

Authorities, especially those closest to the people, must remain vigilant and make the latter sensitive to the maintenance of peace and security.

Everyone must refrain from any act which might violate human rights, and those guilty of such acts must be severely punished.

Among the human rights, the first and the most important one which stands as a condition to is the right to life. That is why those found guilty of murder and assassination must serve without any mercy all the sentences provided in the law as punishment for their offenses.

Those who organize meetings of a political nature or otherwise, must consider the words they use in their written or verbal speeches so as to avoid any remark likely to incite tension among the population and inhabitants of this country.

The National Information Office must bear in mind that it is operating under the umbrella of the Ministry of Information and that its primary function is to educate and unite the entire Rwandan people. Also, it must refrain from broadcasting any information from any source that is likely to cause misunderstanding and disunity within the population.

Any legal entity wanting to report messages or reports broadcast by Radio Rwanda and which is not on the list of those officially authorized to do so and which does not justify its legal existence, must obtain prior authorization from the Ministry of Information before going ahead with any broadcast.

Journalists, for their part, must bear in mind that even if the and the law governing the press recognizes its freedom, there is no law authorizing them to use their publication to sow dissension among Rwandans and jeopardies relations between Rwanda and other countries.

Rwandan ladies and gentlemen, for our country to have lasting security, we all have to condemn this endless war in the north of our country as well as the troubles in the commune of Kanzenze and other similar acts. Peace be upon the sons and daughters of Rwanda.