Rwandans, I address you today in a short speech on two problems of national importance. I do so in my capacity as president of the Republic in order to assure you that the negotiations at Arusha are taking place smoothly and to remind all of us of the responsibilities expected of us in the present troubled and tragic times.

Regarding the negotiations at Arusha, each of us is preoccupied by their development. A return to peace in our country and stability in our region and hence the resumption of development in our country depends on these negotiations. It is extremely important that the Arusha agreements win the backing of our country’s political trends and that no exclusion occurs. Consensus on this subject is indispensable in order to express the reconciliation of all Rwandans with themselves.

Because there are growing fears that these minimum requests might not be met, thus jeopardizing the basis of the negotiations and the peace negotiations due to result from them, I insist after consultations I held with political parties, with church representatives, and our foreign friends I insist on clarifying before the entire nation the principles which must serve as guidelines to the negotiators concerning points which have given rise to so much fear and worry. The clarification does not mean that points on which agreement has already been reached must be reviewed. It is instead on the guidance to be given henceforth to the negotiations, on how to implement the negotiations in practical terms.

Regarding power-sharing during the transitional period leading to elections, the two points on which clarification is to be made concern the distribution of seats within the executive and the setting up of the Transitional National Assembly.

Regarding the executive and thus regarding the transitional government  it is a matter of preventing one group of political trends from detaining on a permanent basis within the executive the two-thirds majority provided in the 30 October Arusha agreement’s Article 21 and to work out its modalities of implementation in case one or several of its members are absent. The setting up of a transitional government which includes political trends other than the political parties which are members of the current transitional government might help in attaining this imperative.

On elections: Although it is true that a certain number of factors make it difficult at present to hold the general elections needed to provide a democratic National Assembly with deputies validated by the people’s votes, the principle of nomination of deputies, as opposed to direct election which must be implemented at the beginning of the transition which concerns the transitional legislative body cannot be tolerated for long.

So the transition period should not last, whatever happens, over 12 months, after which the election will give a true picture of existing political trends and provide our country with republican institutions validated by the will of the people. This 12-month period can then coincide with the expiration of the existing deputies* term of office at the end of 1993.

Pending the elections, the nominated members of the transitional legislative body should also consider the need for a balance between the various political trends. Parallel measures dealing with the future of current National Development Council [CND] members must also be worked out.

Although difficulties might arise over the general and presidential elections, elections at the communal level should not be held up pending the end of the transitional period. Communal elections are needed to strengthen our democracy’s achievements at the grassroots level and provide communes left without burgomasters with new, legitimized ones, as well as replacing controversial ones in a proper manner. This, in my view, is in a way an extremely important measure against the insecurity problems now prevailing in our communes.

Regarding the implementation of the Arusha agreements, the utmost care must be taken to ensure that they are implemented as realistically as possible, and this to ensure that genuine national reconciliation which is the main aim of the negotiations takes place.

The Arusha negotiations must also work out a realistic timetable for the implementation of the agreements to enable Rwanda to put infrastructures in place and amend laws.

To ensure that the agreements are legally enforceable and that the entire Rwandan people fully back them conviction, the negotiators must choose the .manner by which to seek approval for the agreements, that is to say by way of the current CND or by means of a referendum.

The above is what I insisted on clarifying publicly so that no ambiguity at all affecting either the orientation on the spirit guiding the negotiations will remain before the results expected from these negotiations materialize.