Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen: May I ask you to stand and observe a minute of silence in memory of the late Energy Minister Felicien Gatabazi and Martin Bucyana chairman of the Coalition for the Defence of the Republic. I had invited you to this ceremony for the establishment of the two remaining transitional institutions, namely the Transitional National Assembly and broad-based transitional government. I had thought the situation was ripe following the consultations and discussions which have been continuing since 5th January, and all the long meetings which have been held. But I note, as you do, that unfortunately we are still at the of 5th January. I cannot establish a transitional broad-based transitional government while the prime minister who will lead it is absent.

Somebody wanted to make a joke. He thought he was joking. He said: Honestly, it is a strange situation in Rwanda, to have two prime ministers, one for a government that no longer functions, and another for a government that has not yet arrived. More pessimistically, that is the situation, and it is carrying on for too long. I can only agree, and at the same time thank those who responded to the call. The ceremony was in fact scheduled to take place yesterday afternoon. After the consultations I have just mentioned, and after the meeting I had with the prime minister-designate two days ago, it had appeared that the ceremony would take place yesterday afternoon. But with the death of the late Gatabazi, we had to postpone it until this morning at 1000, and at 0800 local times I was told that the prime minister had asked that the ceremony be postponed 14 hours, which I accepted. So that is the situation.

On my part, I do not see, after all these consultations and discussions, what is left for me to do. Those with better brains than ours can give us further suggestions. But I believe everyone has contributed their good will.

So, since the media are here, I take this opportunity to also launch an appeal to the Rwandan population not to lose hope, to remain committed to peace, which they have always sought and abided by, and which was disrupted by an unfortunate chance, but which the Rwandan people still yearn for. Let all the events we have gone through, the disasters we have talked about, be a lesson for us to remain united despite the various parties to which we belong, despite the various regions we were bom in and despite our ethnic affiliations. We all are and we all remain Rwandans, all equal, with equal rights.

I call upon the country's political class and upon all people to understand that democracy is not to refuse to speak to each other; it is to accept the other and to make a step towards him as he makes a step towards you. For my part, after all this dialogue and these consultations, I do not know what else I can do. Those who have brains which function better than ours can give us their suggestions. I think, however, that everyone has contributed their goodwill to this matter.

I take this opportunity in the presence of the media to appeal to the Rwandan population not to be discouraged, to remain attached to peace which it [the population] has always sought, this peace which has been disturbed by this sad event and which the Rwandan people still values.

Let all the events which we have experienced, and the tragedies which we have just mentioned, serve as lessons to us to remain united. Despite the political parties to which we belong, despite the various regions where we were bom, despite our ethnic allegiances, we are all Rwandans, all equal, with the same rights and duties.

I therefore call upon the Rwandan population, and particularly those who are in charge of it the mayors, the municipal councils and the prefects to preach peace and to continue to call for tolerance regardless of partisan differences. Maybe this is how we shall be able to build democracy.

I call particularly upon the media to convey the message of unity and national reconciliation, for development and welfare. I rely on its goodwill.

The president of the republic, Maj-Gen Juvenal Habyarimana, hopes that the transitional national assembly and broad-based government will be established on 20th January, at the latest.

In a message he gave in the national language, Kinyarwanda, yesterday, President Habyarimana said Rwanda now faced major challenges which required the urgent establishment of all the transitional institutions provided for in the [Arusha] peace accord.

Beyond these challenges, the head of state added, we must win the support of the international community and of all our creditors. That is why, President Habyarimana added, it was unacceptable for a few political parties to continue to retard the establishment of the new institutions which the Rwandan people need so much.

I, Habyarimana Juvenal, in the name of Almighty God, solemnly swear before the nation that I will loyally fulfil my functions, remain faithful to the Republic of Rwanda, respect the state institutions and promote the interests of the Rwandan people while respecting the basic law and other laws. 

[Announcer] According to AFP, the president of the republic declared during the news conference that he wanted elections to be held before 1995, the date scheduled by the Arusha accord. According to him, it would be wiser not to wait 22 months before holding the elections. They should be spaced out to prevent jostling at the end of the period, he stressed.