In Ivory Coast, for you all Ivorians and Ivorian, my dear compatriots, the past year has been on the whole favorable. God has willed that the great trials solent spared us, and our country has continued its upward path through a combination of fortunate circumstances in increased stability and a consolidated unit.

Certainly this is not the time to let us lead by feelings of pride that would anticipate too much of the progress that we have to accomplish yet. But why though not rejoice in this new step forward, why not remove a comforting feeling for the present, an encouragement for the future, especially why not emphasize adequately the value of collective effort has achieved this result?

As fades the painful memory of a time that we wished would have never known, the foundation on which, inside, we have based our policy, we seem more solid than ever.

Whether our party consciousness, crucible and spearhead the nation out triumphant and purified of the event, and assuming the role that it designates its glorious past, whether our institutions designed as an instrument of struggle and progress, and who, having given proof of their strength, begin to measure their effectiveness at home, and their ability to adapt to new situations that exist outside ; that finally it's our administration closer to the people, more competent, and whose officers now reap the benefits of patience and selflessness, yes! We now have the belief to have met the political, psychological and moral that we allow á continue our development efforts in the balance and length, that is to say, within reason and trust.

This has allowed us to take the chance that natural factors particularly conducive and favorable market conditions offered us the last months of the year, in every way, confirmed the promises it gave in the production area coffee, cocoa, timber, bananas, pineapples, and regarding the promising development of the cultivation of rice, coconut, rubber tree and palm oil, traffic in our ports, enviable position in our trade balance, the rapid increase in energy consumption, increasing our purchases of capital goods, the importance of our investments and the modernization of our infrastructure demonstrate the strength of our economy and its possibilities for expansion. Now for some important products, Côte d'Ivoire, the African scale, and even globally, a country with.

A country with which inspires confidence, and justifies that his friends have placed in him is the precious capital of trust we enjoy worldwide prompting the France of course, the generous France, our great friend, but also the United States, West Germany and many others, which also prompted various particular institutions or bodies the European Development Fund and number of foreign investors to cooperate with us. We enjoy this so many competitions that are, not all of it is true, neither disinterested nor unilateral. And is not it better that way anyway? Who remain, and for a long time, essential for time to come, essential to our development.

Thus the country's industrialization has made another leap, industrial production more than doubled in four years, and is now in second place of our national resources. And industrialization, for us, this means thousands of new jobs, agricultural production recovered on site and with more regular opportunities, more diversified and less vulnerable economy, progressive social promotion, so decisive on the path economic independence.

A CIVIL CODE OF MODERN AFRICA

But economic progress is insufficient would reveal whether the man would not find a place, and if the march forward was not accompanied by an effort socially. This effort, we have achieved. We realized with a boldness that can surprise, which may worry sometimes, as she caught as she worried wrong yesterday, we know, we see it today. Are we indeed rich enough not to think big? Have we not in some areas, a delay that requires us to aim away?

This is what we have undertaken to do. In making this major reform of the Civil Code, which is now an African Civil Code, but the Civil Code of modern Africa, a fairly safe Africa of his legacy for use depending on the current context, enacting a new Labor Code, more adapted to the needs of economic development, expanding and ensuring the guarantees of the worker, while he starts to treat him in the company and in the company's rightful place.

It is also part of this development that our country has in recent weeks of a Body of Information, which meets the expectations of our people and also the questions anyone can ask about us, that agents Public Service soon benefit from a status improved significantly their material and moral situation, the youth of Ivory Coast, now in the new University of Abidjan the opportunity to prepare with maximum efficiency to but difficult tasks that await exhaltantes, and the grip of the destiny of their country.

L'EXTENSION OF schoolgirl

Made possible through sound management of our public finance and economic development of the country, the social effort has also resulted in the creation, the magnification and the start of construction of new hospitals and new health units, by increasing hospital capacity, and by the significant increase of medical personnel.

In the area of ​​the course that almost a fifth of the Budget for 1965 will be spent, the expansion of education was ensured, while most efforts portrait on improving the education system, the systematic search for a increased yield and closer adaptation to the needs of the national economy. All these actions will of course be continued during the next year will be realized important projects that the government has developed to improve rural housing and to provide a solution to the housing problem in urban areas

Always Keep Reason

Renouncing the risky initiatives, standing away from the bustle and hustle of which the world, and especially our continent, too frequently give the show, choosing to judge every action, whatever continent they come in all objectivity, refusing to reserve its complacency or indignation in particular, Côte d'Ivoire, benevolent and fraternal in all endeavors, not without difficulty and without merit, "Always Keep Reason."

It is this attitude that dictates the actions of our country in the three main areas of its foreign policy: The international expansion, based on the principle of Non-Interference and the search for negotiated solutions, cooperation with all countries, including willing countries to help Ivory Coast without interfering in its internal affairs, and share with it the same ideals of peace, freedom and progress, finally achieving African unity.

We have always thought and said that it should be pursued with patience and realism, taking into account the facts, facts that are not always what we would like them to be, but nevertheless imposed on us and which we must consider. Verbalism we prefer deeds, the reckless measure promises to buildings too slow legal osmosis between peoples and men with premature innovations consolidation of what exists, shoplifting and the clash of our differences taking advantage of what brings us closer. We what brings us closer. We think the time is coming when we share this view also with many of our brothers in Africa, will prevail, that the time is approaching when the first concrete manifestations of our desire for unity will arise, and will indicate the long and difficult path of reason and possibility.

May it please God that A

Such, Ivorians Ivorians! our achievements, our goals and our hopes!

Please God protect our beloved country, to enable the achievement of good wishes that the bottom of my heart I address you tonight, it helps us gather in the new year the fruits of our union of our discipline and our work!

