My dear compatriots,

At the same time it is for everyone the opportunity to unleash a legitimate joy, celebration of the National Day gives us the opportunity to measure the progress for five years and take a look at the likely evolution of our countries in the coming years.

This report, I am pleased to provide the do here in Korhogo, economic and administrative center of the Ivorian North which, for a day to the rank of capital devoted herself for months to organize this event with enthusiasm, patriotism and success which I like to pay special tribute on behalf of the Ivorian government and on my own behalf.

After a long and sometimes painful evolution in which our valiant P.D.C.I. - R.D.A. held the role one is born, and in agreement with the leaders and the French people, the Ivory Coast, five years ago today, finally saw his hopes come true and, in joy and in a unanimous friendship fortunately preserved, became independent. Now responsible for his fate, it was up to create a state, to preserve the unity of the nation, to provide the foundation for rapid development, continuous and profitable to everyone, and affirm without its existence.

A IVOIRIENNE NATION'S PLACE AND TRIBALISM Regionalism

This state, we created it by adopting a constitution modeled our personality, our needs and our ideals, by giving the country institutions that have proven their strength and flexibility, by modifying and branching of now closer administrative structures of the people and often animated by Ivorian officials, by providing public services staff both more numerous and more competent that has, for some time, a status that meet their aspirations.

It was also necessary to tribalism and regionalism, necessarily too limited in our time gradually substituate the Ivorian nation, united on the same soil, around the same party for the same struggle for a ideal and a common goal.

Respectful of the original features that constitute the precious heritage of the past, the Ivorian nation is built every day on the benches of schools and universities, in the barracks and on construction sites and within work teams: time is working relentlessly for her that pushes the horizon of the village of the tribe or region to the much larger, an exchange economy.

The constitution of the Ivorian nation has been greatly facilitated by the activity and the tireless dedication of activists P.D.C.I. worthy heir of R.D.A., catalyst of all the forces and all the talents of the nation, and how useful link between working people and a government that is not, and will not be, the government of the people.

Tacked inside, with the institutions, structures and people she needed, led by an administration and a conscious political organization of their mission and their respective responsibilities, the Ivorian nation, outgoing nans penny reinforced trials, n is given the essential task to perform in the best possible time, the economic and social development that should give meaning to our political independence and strengthen the foundations.

THREE BILLION SEVEN BILLION

In the field of education in the first place, the great movement of schooling, favored by the regime that emerged from the framework legislation has continued and is extended more widely throughout the country.

From 200,000 in 1960, the number of students now stands at 347,000, while at the same time, the percentage of children in school rose from 28.5 to 43.75% despite a substantial increase in population. As for the second cycle, the increase was even more characteristic: the number of graduates has increased significantly, as the holders of B. E. whereas the quota holders of B.E.P.C. and students entering sixth tripled.

Meanwhile, technical and vocational education and training, these technicians tank whose national economy so desperately needs, enjoyed special attention from the government, and higher education was central Abidjan erected in 1963 in university. This quantum leap has been achieved a year old price of a substantial increase in appropriations allocated to the Ministry of Education which, over a little more than three billion francs in 1960, reaching almost seven billion that France year and thus represent almost 22% of the general budget against 12.6% five years earlier.

Certainly an effort of comparable magnitude could be continued indefinitely without other sectors, no less essential, are dangerously neglected. Therefore, the development of education, while extending, will mark a slowdown; the creation of new schools for tens of thousands of additional students, will aim mainly to reduce disparities between regions and to include in the economic and social development plans the actions in education.

However, the pace of investment in this field will be strengthened, and the proportion allocated to technical education and the different aspects of vocational training will be significantly increased. Finally, a particular emphasis will be on improving the quality of education and its better adaptation to the social environment, the increased efficiency of the education system, including through the progressive upgrading of the Faculty, the development of selection and guidance, closer liaison between programs and the needs of the economy and a more rational use of certain elements by specialized courses.

At the same time, the enormous effort that the Ivorian nation has made in five years in favor of Education, will begin to bear the desired fruit to name a few examples particularly meaningful, the number of holders of B. E. and B.E.P.C. double by 1970 while the number of graduates will quadruple. These figures already imagine a university Abidjan enjoying a growing influx of Ivorian and African students, and hope for a new generation of agents of technical assistance, for our youth, methodically prepared exhaltantes but complex tasks ahead.

BUILDING HUMAN AND MATERIAL MEANS

Although by its nature, it can not always be expressed so as striking, social development, has, in other areas, made at a comparable during the last five years: in terms of Public Health this was the qualitative improvement of medical staff, performed at all levels by appropriate training facilities, the increase in the number of highly qualified practitioners available to us for technical assistance. The gradual modernization of existing buildings and facilities and the opening of hospitals, maternity hospitals, clinics and new medical positions.

During the next five-year period, this effort, of course, continue and the pace of public investment will be more sustained, measured by, among others the completion of the university hospital in Abidjan and the National Institute of Public health, the creation of the Institut Pasteur, the National blood transfusion Center, the surgical block of the Daloa hospital, the extension of Bingerville psychiatric hospital, the county hospital in Korhogo and construction a number of hospitals and health centers in the periphery and in the regions abidjannaise moles well served the country, especially in the North.

Government action in this area will strengthen the effectiveness of human and material resources available to curative medicine, and develop parallel preventive medicine more modern design, in which education and public support will hold, of course, a place capital.

The work performed by labor and social affairs, is not consistent moles, either the preparation or the enforcement of legislation and regulatory activities concerning the status of employees or the social protection of workers.

While the government was involved more closely in the operation of agencies and commissions called upon to define professional politics, the first social centers were emerging that the labor exchanges of Bouake and Daloa spread completed, and the company of Abidjan, the Ivorian labor Code was promulgated in 1964: Côte d'Ivoire had therefore an essential tool that adapts the legislation to the principles of the Ivorian constitution, political and economic options of the government and new administrative structures.

ENGAGING THE WORKER IN RESULT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Over the next five years, the role of the Office of the Main - Work to be expanded, particularly regarding the use of information relevant to the labor market, inspections and new social centers will be open both Abidjan in the departments.

Meanwhile, will continue the development of social protection schemes that will endeavor to employees safe from risks and ensure effective solidarity at the national level. A Social Insurance Code, currently under preparation, will unify and harmonize the various texts known to regulate this matter, and will be supplemented later, provided the financial resources generated by economic expansion, with provisions for the allocation of possession of the home, old-age insurance, the death benefit, the medical worker protection and coverage of disability and long illness. All these achievements and projects underscore the constant concern of the Government to involve workers in the results of economic development, to involve them more closely in the life of the company, and ensure the most effectively against certain risks inherent in their condition.

The interest shown by the government in social achievements is also expressed through the development of housing construction, and some recent works demonstrate our commitment to provide a satisfactory solution to the problem of habitat that the rate of growth main Ivorian towns makes it particularly acute.

Priorities must be set, unobstructed formulas, financial, human and material collected, which is now and will accelerate the pace of construction, whether in urban or rural habitat habitat: Indeed, from rural areas, knowing that for many years to come, the Ivorian economy will continue to stand for an essential part of the prosperity and vitality of his campaigns, the leaders of this country have at heart to do do their peasant brothers of second-class citizens, but will focus, instead, to ensure their living conditions comparable to those of urban dwellers.

THROUGH COOPERATION OF IVORY COAST PEOPLE AND FRIENDS

It is evident that social progress that we could promote since independence could not be considered, at least with this magnitude, if the country's economic development had given the government the means to achieve it.

Again, some numbers will better appreciate the work, some figures which it would also be premature and contrary to our habits to boast but nevertheless highlight the results achieved through the cooperation of the Ivorian people and friends , and we encourage all to persevere in the long and difficult road we still have to go.

Since 1960, gross domestic product rose from 145 to 206 billion francs in 1960: taking into account the increase in population and the increasing cost of living, income per capita is password 33 430 to 41 660 Frs Frs, an increase of 24.6%.

Also during the same period, exports increased by 77.5% and our imports 83.5% respectively from 34.1 to 62,500,000,000 francs and 44.2 to 78,300,000,000 francs, and thus giving the Ivory Coast the most favorable trade balance in Africa.

Taking advantage of this boom, the Ivory Coast has broadened the foundation for future growth, doubling from 1960 to 1964, the amount of public investments representing more than 57 billion francs for the first five years of this decade, of which nearly half was devoted to the only economic infrastructure.

AND THANKS TO TRUST PEOPLE AND POLITICAL STABILITY

Meanwhile, private investment, were also represented more than double during those five years, more than 75 billion francs.

This expansion is due in large part by the remarkable growth of our agricultural production and forestry, including that of coffee, for which we have become the first African producer and the third largest producer, by that of cocoa, which we now ranks fourth in the world, and those of banana and wood that we must take first place in Africa.

In addition, with the important machinery we have control to make the modernization of agriculture, the trials are successful, will allow the North and the Center, far less privileged to know at ease less than that of the forest regions.

These results, everyone abroad, agrees to hold brightest are due to the work of all the people of this country and the wide confidence we have given our friends, encouraged by political stability in Côte d ' Ivory and unconditional acceptance of his people to the policy of its representatives. They are explicit enough to witness the courageous rigor with which were managed public finances and wisdom but also the dynamism that have consistently governed the design and implementation of the government's economic policy.

Certainly, we must not hide from ourselves the significant share that success in these amounts to very favorable conditions, nor the dangers, --malheureusement neglected, in my opinion, overly industrialized countries - posed to a young economy fluctuations or dramatic degradation during certain important agricultural products.

The economic development plan of the Ivory Coast specifically addresses these concerns and is, in the context of continued expansion, ensuring a greater balance in the national economy.

For better distribution, geographical first, which will be sought in terms of the expansion of food crops and family, as well as the growth of rice crops, sugar cane and textile fibers, and by the development of the Ivorian Southwest.

Furthermore, through the completion of these projects and those related to oil palm and rubber in particular, expanding the range of our plant production and industrialization encouraged intelligently mitigate the vulnerability of our economy by decreasing our dependence on the import of finished products, allowing us to promote our products and provide them more regular and more profitable outlets.

In 1970, the GDP should be increased to 293 billion francs 160: well, given the increasing cost of living and population growth, per capita income will increase to 51 307 francs, marking and an increase of over 53.5% over its 1960 level.

At that time, the face of the economy has not been significantly altered, but while the Ivory Coast is likely to import less food, it will tend to produce and convert more of his self the role that still currently play coffee and cocoa production and foreign trade will significantly reduce the benefit of new agricultural products and industrial products.

Development of food crops, crop diversification in favor of more profitable, less vulnerable and more easily transformable of them, increase the industrial potential - pointed out last week, with the laying of the first stone of a sack and by the early testing of the new oil refinery - these are for the coming years, the main objectives of our economic policy, with the grace of God, with our friends and our work, we expect to achieve.

Finally, the electrification of the country is quite extensive. The two dams Bia provide effective support to the industrialization of the country. But with the great dam Koussou which, hopefully, will soon enter the field of realities that industrialization will know the greatest growth.

do Is being too optimistic to pursue ambitious goals too? The future will tell, in the same way, we hope, has already ratified some of our forecasts. But what we can be sure, however, is that not enough ambitious and optimistic 6etre to succeed. We can achieve certain results without a certain dose of optimism motivated and without ambition in the service of a great cause.

RELAXATION INTERNATIONAL, AFRICAN UNITY AND COOPERATION

While she was giving the structures of a state and that it was concerned about its economic and social development, the Ivory Coast, now independent countries took place as such internationally; no representations that many States did him the honor to draw on its soil by those he opened abroad within the various organizations to which he adhered soon, our country, without excessive illusions about the its important role in the regulation of certain issues, but still determined to make its voice heard, was the policy of his principles and his situation.

This policy, research-driven international expansion, the will to achieve African unity and cooperation, which we are more essential than ever, has not changed since August 7, 1960; without fear of error, we can say that it will not change in the future as it reflects our commitment to careful consideration of values ​​that every Ivorian is attached by the deepest and the best of himself.

When we say and prove our commitment to peace, liberty, dignity, justice - even in its economic and social aspects to universal brotherhood, we are fully aware of interpreting the feelings of every Ivorian, those of today and those of yesterday, and we are not ashamed to align ourselves deliberately knew these values ​​there.

Therefore, nobody should be surprised to see us adopt the doctrines and methods of our principles, we seek tirelessly to see a negotiated solution to the outstanding problems, refuse any interference in the affairs that are not ours, we preserve otherwise ideologies as our ideal in our interests to keep our reason and objectivity - even should they be criticized temporarily - in the face of events, in short to see us behave as if became independent, we heard also be free.

THE DANGER OF COMMUNIST CHINA BEIJING

In this regard, we will continue to denounce the danger for peace in Africa, African Unity, the effective independence of our continent, China Communist Beijing. It seems that Russia has waived impose communism in Africa. Thus, while the danger of Russian communism fades, appears on African soil, Chinese communism, uncompromising, inhuman hatred and division factor. With its formidable weapons of subversion and absolute contempt for the human person, the China People barely mask its expansionist aims in Africa. Africans if they want to live in peace with each other and at peace with the outside world to make up one day, and the sooner the better, those who have gone before them on the path of progress, they must observe the vigilant with regard to Communist China that attempt wealth and African vacuum.

In terms of African politics, African politics and we have in mind, for our part, that the construction of African Unity, our designs have not varied more. We also remain unswervingly committed to this great and generous idea, too convinced of the necessity of the unity of our continent, reserved with regard to any initiative that, under the pretext of accelerating the movement of history - would compromise the realization, perhaps forever.

Mindful of the lessons of history and the nature of the obstacles that some similar projects meet, even today, we believe that before to build, it is necessary to know, to respect, to hear and s' unite. We also believe that regional agreements and even other groupings less localized, provided that they remain independent of any ideology as a simple step, far from harming African Unity, on the contrary, likely to favor its realization . And we are so respectful of initiatives that some of our brothers have taken in this area that we do not despair of seeing them one day bear with us what they seem so to accommodate them.

Ivory Coast also continue a policy of broad cooperation with all his friends who are willing to trust him and all those who, inspired by friendship or by a clear vision of their true interests, decided to be for us loyal partners.

THE IVORY COAST BELIEVES HAVE CROSSED THE THRESHOLD UNDERDEVELOPMENT

It is clear in fact that in the world today and even more in the future, cooperation for us, still prove useful, and that the time has not come when it will cease to be indispensable. It is also clear that we certainly would not have made this progress which we are justly proud, that we could seriously consider continuing our development if we werent able accounts on the collaboration of our friends. Allow me, on this day, to thank particularly France, friendly, generous, and its partners in the European Economic Community, the United States, Israel, the Republic of China and all States that have brought us a particularly appreciated help.

Everyone thinks today that international detente and the global balance can only be ensured by the accession of the newly independent nations of modern techniques.

For its part, the Ivory Coast, believed to have crossed the threshold of underdevelopment. It has become a developing country. Between these two terms there are more than a vocabulary artifice ago there you well, my dear compatriots, the entire distance between the resignation of hope, all the progress made in recent years by our country, thanks to the hard work of her children, in all areas.

God grant that a near future sees us take another decisive step, and allows us well to make an even greater contribution to the relaxation, general prosperity and the realization of our great purpose: African Unity . How then Ivory Coast, genuinely tolerant and respectful of all beliefs, ardently loving peace and progress, would consider himself rewarded for his efforts and sacrifices.

For the harmonious future of our country, our faith is complete in you, my dear compatriots.

LONG LIVE THE IVORY COAST

