Ivorian, Ivorians, My dear compatriots,

Six years have passed since that glorious day forever inscribed in our hearts where Côte d'Ivoire acceded to the independence. Thus succeeded to an end a long political battle that, while keeping intact its old friendships, would enable our country to acquire new and now assume its own destiny.

The time has come in the presence of distinguished guests that we have the joy and the honor to respond to our calls to share the joy of an entire people to recall how Côte d'Ivoire has designed its role now sovereign nation and the use made of his young freedom.

Before outlining an assessment of our achievements, to indicate our future prospects, it should be noted that the anniversary we celebrate in this auspicious day falls in line with the ideals that we have always animated.

The emancipation of the African people, the daily struggle to improve living conditions, the affirmation of the personality of the States born in international life, equal rights and duties in respect of options specific to each are still the principles of our action. Ivory Coast, land exchange par excellence, solemnly reaffirms once again its unchanged belief in the virtue of dialogue, in the need to confront the opposing points of view to reach a peaceful solution of the antagonisms and this both in International domain for internal use.

We welcome they deserve the effort or are among so many heartbreaks, destruction and hatred, the desire of union, peace and harmonious construction of a better world.

The United Nations, the Organization of African Unity, the Organization African and Malagasy Common, the Council of the Entente, want to contribute in their own way and with its own means. These institutions represent for us the various stages of a slow and irreversible path towards more justice and more solidarity between men. We will continue to give them our loyal and stubborn contest because our struggle will not cease as long as there misery relieve an injustice to be rectified, a misunderstanding to dispel.

To carry out such an ambitious mission that draws its irresistible force in the faith in man, to achieve continuing daily further building our country, we need the support of each of our compatriots.

APRES L'UNITE TO SET

It is absolutely necessary that all Ivorians and all Ivorian participate in the joint effort by the work certainly, but also by being impregnated with what I call the mystique of unity. It was found again, African countries have recently gained independence have become States before the nations.

The Ivorian state exists, it is structured more every day and plays a significant role in international affairs. Within its borders the nation is built little by little. immense work when the persistent work of generations must register over the years and that exceeding the particularities outrageous and anachronistic tribalism can only afford. Having awareness of belonging to a community of ideals and interests, feel first and foremost Ivorian, insert its efforts in the framework defined by the party and the government, as should be for each and every one us supreme ambition.

Nothing validly built into incoherence, precipitation and instability. After the major imperative of national unity, the stability is imposed on us. The stability in the institutions and confidence in those who must animate were once again beautifully materialized on November 7 by the accession of the country entirely to the policy defined by the PDCL - GDR, to those who have the task applying.

To maintain this continuity in action, leaders at all levels of the political, economic, administrative and social, must remain confident and in constant contact with the population.

Again, there especially, proves beneficial virtue of dialogue. The actions of public men, inspired by concern for the interests which they are responsible should be understood by those to whom they apply, and they gain invaluable when they draw their substance in membership or better yet the wish of the people.

Many examples prove the panorama and the Ivory Coast in 1966 would not be laughing as if this continuous exchange between officials and the masses was not long inserted in our daily lives.

GREAT WORK HAS BEEN ACCOMPLISHED

Since 1960, considerable work has been accomplished in the legislative field which finds its concrete expression in the modernization of our administrative structures, the development of our economic potential and adaptation of our company to the world of the twentieth century.

After the people, from whom we have our legitimate power and holds no shares of national sovereignty, have overwhelmingly approved a constitution designed by the Ivorians with a view to ensuring respect for the popular will and efficiency in action various executive, legislative and judicial extensive legal construction has provided to our country the necessary framework for its development.

A government that puts daily up the instruments of our progress in strict compliance with the options of our party and is committed to work for the general good.

An Assembly legislates and whose decisive effort in our nation-building can not be over emphasized.

An Economic and Social Council attentive to all that can contribute to the development of the country and who acquires a hearing every day more valuable thanks to the relevance of its opinions and studies.

A perfectly structured Supreme Court which, on the first day, let appear the particular quality of leading its members.

A developed administrative and judicial system suited our needs with concern for the administration ever closer to our people and the judge of the defendant, such were the foundations on which would stand the harmonious construction of our young state.

Because for as satisfying as might appear to mind the legal structure and set up, it showed to us that the benefit of providing us the instrument of our action.

Faced with the countless problems passing the former status territory overseas to full sovereignty as a free nation, we had to act on all fronts.

How this sensitive mutation us was facilitated by the unalterable confidence of all Ivorians, by the generous support of France which, under the leadership of its prestigious chef knew adapt smoothly and without a second thought colonizing its action yesterday the only form of intervention consistent with our dignity as independent countries, the cooperation it is fair to say that day the quality and the invaluable assistance it provides us.

We had the joy of seeing hurrying around us in a contest of good will which no more than we appreciate the value, the countries of old Europe grouped in the Economic European Community which African and Malagasy States associated have long experienced the incomparable contribution to the modernization of their economies.

THE CONTRIBUTION OF CHINA AND ISRAEL

For its part the great American nation, despite the multiple imperatives that gives it its position in the free world, was able to bring us the inestimable support of his friendship, his technical and financial assistance and to serve our people some of its best children.

But the assistance we enjoy does not remain the preserve of larger states. I want to salute especially the contribution to our economic and social development of the Republic of China and the State of Israel. Their technicians have conquered long citizenship among us, their constant example of hard work remains for all a lesson.

Finally, it is not inconceivable that, even on our continent, will play one day that we would close the solidrité between states, regardless of their membership in the English-speaking world and French, in black Africa or the Africa Arab-Berber. Thus would be fulfilled one of our dearest wishes: to see the young nations of the old African practice in international relations that sense of mutual aid, which remains one of the most solid foundation on what to blend our traditional societies.

We do not intend to freeze much in immutable structures and when we appeared that the survival of certain traditions as a barrier or an obstacle to the harmonious development of our country, we have not hesitated to print necessary changes. Thus, after a long campaign by business explanation of our activists and our political and administrative leaders among the populations concerned, the essential texts have emerged.

A Civil Code devotes renovated suppression of polygamy and dowry reform, a modern civil state is established.

In the land sector, the traditional system of land ownership is changed to the state benefit to allow the development of vast spaces.

The fact is that our permanent concern is to harmoniously develop our country for the benefit of its people to achieve political independence apses, the threshold of economic takeoff that separates the developing countries economically major nations .

MAJOR STEPS OF THE JOURNEY

Already, a great progress has been made that it is now appropriate to recall the major stages.

The evolution of the production of key business segments can be summarized in a few figures.

In 1960, the primary sector led with 70 billion, the secondary industry accounted for production of 18 billion and 52 billion the service sector.

In 1965, the figures for the amount to respectively 91, 39 and 92 billion.

Three considerations should be made: in five years, all of our production increased from 140 to 222 billion, while the services sector is leading the development and more than doubling during this period, the manufacturing sector reflects the industrialization accelerated our country.

These findings reinforce comforting when the lights next few clarifications.

The importance of the rural sector in our economy justifies the special interest we pay him. It directly concerns the great mass of our people and its progression determines the harmonious development of the country entirely.

Major export crops remain our main source of income and make Ivory Coast the third largest coffee producer, the fourth largest producer of cocoa and give it a very enviable position with regard to bananas and pineapple.

But the experience of recent years shows us how much remains vulnerable an economy based on the export of products whose international prices are experiencing too deep downturns.

Also, waiting for plays in this crucial area of ​​international solidarity on the need for which we continue to attract the attention of major consumer countries, waiting for the light of day organization of the commodity markets - without which a sudden during fall, completely beyond our action, enough to annhiler the benefits of bilateral and multilateral assistance - caution in us - does improve and diversify our production. Real efforts have been made in this direction, I do not want to demonstrate that improving the quality of our coffee and our cocoa, tireless efforts result of education of the producer and sufficiently rigorous standards packaging.

Meanwhile, banana and pineapple plantations knew a spectacular increase coupled with a remarkable organization of the profession or African producers are of growing importance.

THE OIL PALM FARM HOPE

But we are aiming to expand the range of our cultures to enrich the country and mitigate, as far as we can, the price fluctuations. In this concern meets the creation of vast rubber plantations that produced in 1965 2.700 tons of rubber until the 12,000 tons planned for 1975.

Oil palm is one of our strongest hopes: the implantation in five years, under the aegis of the remarkable SODEPALM 32,000 ha, financed by the European Fund, the promising development of village plantations, concomitant construction 'oil mills, are for the whole South savannah region, job creation, wealth and rising living standards.

The north of the country is not neglected. If economic development, to date, has primarily affected the southern and central regions, we expect the expansion of rice cultivation that it brings to our procurement solution, while providing the courageous peasantry department North income to the extent of its work and its needs.

Similarly Allen cotton cultivation, which now covers 10,000 ha producing 10,000 tons, in 1970 will reach the figure of 50,000 tonnes for the benefit of growers, our textile industry and more generally in our economy.

This table outlines the broad perspective, the wealth of our soil, involve a big gap if the emphasis was not placed on the timber activities. Whether logging or that derive industries, this sector of our business is characterized by impressive figures: 1,250,000 tons of logs and 110,000 tons of sawn timber exported in 1965, investments considerable valued at more than 9 billion CFA francs for the period 1960-1965, and an impressive number of jobs available to our workforce.

The undeniable success that accuses agriculture and forestry, hopes even larger than we legitimately puts him resulting from a convergence of effort, talent and competition that I like to salute, he s 'whether business leaders and their collaborators, research institutes of the highest quality that Ivory Coast is proud to see so masterfully work on its soil, a semi-public economic sector expresses the dynamism of youth, legitimate aim and importance of the contributed capital of the country Common market without which these great opportunities we would have remained closed.

ANOTHER STEP: Industrialization

But we do know that too, only a diversified agricultural economy as it is, has never characterized a developed country. Another step is to cross, it is called industrialization.

It has experienced in recent years a development even more spectacular than that of any other activity; it is beyond my purpose to list all the achievements that have emerged since 1960. But I can not, however, ignore those who treat our soil products such as modern latex factory PATH, establishment model processing and storage of coffee, Ivory Café Nescafé factory, that of the ODS producing butter and cocoa mass, towering achievements Blohorn group, pineapple factory's SALCI.

Food industries are amply represented with Grands Moulins d'Abidjan, Breweries, one of which was renovated and the other has created since 1960, the institutions dealing with dairy products, biscuits and bakeries which have certainnes reached the industrial level.

The textile industry participates widely in this progress, whether in Gonfreville in Bouake establishments that come to add to their already remarkable achievements a new weaving plant, or recent creations in Abidjan of yarns, weaving, printing, dyes, and a factory way in jute bags completion.

I shall be careful not to omit even more significant achievements, such as the assembly line of the motor vehicles of SAFAR, workshops a remarkable modernism Ivoiral whence come sheet and products made of aluminum, the clinker grinding factory Socimat that opens our construction sites of new opportunities, the model refinery of the Ivorian Refining Company which, treating 600,000 tonnes per year, satisfied petroleum produce needs of the country and whose production possibilities predict exports to the extent of the needs of our neighbors.

Some data eloquently summarize the progress made by the Ivory Coast since its independence.

Industrial production has more than doubled in value from 1960 to 1965, the surplus in our trade balance is around 10 billion CFA francs, having reached 11 and a half billion in 1964, the investisements made in our country in 1965 only exceed 38 billion, of which 20 billion is which alone offered on the labor market, tens of thousands of new jobs since 1960.

INFRASTRUCTURE NECESSARY CONDITIONS OF DEVELOPMENT

The automotive windshield of cars has tripled and the number of trucks and special vehicles has doubled in six years.

These results are not due to chance. They reflect both the strong will of the government and the Ivorian people to make the necessary efforts to reach economic maturity and confidence that our watchful liberal policy creates both among friendly nations as among financial groups and companies interested in the development of Africa.

The political stability enjoyed by the Ivory Coast sharpness and permanence of its options, adopting a realistic investisements Code which guarantees the necessary benefit of those who participate in our growth while allowing reuse on our soil to a portion of the profits, are certainly to the world masters assets.

We want even more in play that we do not just passively wait for others' accomplishments. I told the huge transformation that is being fulfilled in our agriculture and the spectacular growth of the industrial sector.

Meanwhile, our country has been able to provide the means that determine the progress. A development plan drawing on foreign experience and perfectly adapted to the actual circumstances Ivorian sets priorities, made choice among emergency and is the driving force of our progress.

We understood this fundamental truth to that infrastructure is one of the most necessary conditions for development.

Thus if échelonnèrent in recent years, many large-scale works. Increasing our energy resources through dams Ayamé I and II and to the Abidjan thermal plant. The improvement of the road network, the extension of the port of Abidjan, the modernization of the Régie Abidjan-Niger, the development of posts and telecommunications, the work of municipal administration and urban interest to both cities within the capital, an effort to build rural housing and urban unprecedented, are the main headings of the ledger of our renovation, each worthy of further developments.

VITALITY IN THE FIELD OF CONSTRUCTION

Suffice it to recall qu`en 1960 traffic Abidjan port amounted to 1.776 million tons. It has doubled in five years since atteingit in 1965, 3.612 million tons. As an ongoing effort to modernize and expand the incomparable is that the port is maintained at huge tool of services that one expects, be they berths of ore port, harbor fishing, of all oil, timber port, banana dock.

Everyone can see continue under his eyes the construction of the second bridge of Abidjan which will be open to traffic next year, adding to Abidjan a new class technical achievement, made necessary by the extension of our capital and dynamism of the country entirely.

This vitality is expressed eloquently in the field of urban planning and construction. A real thirst wellness seized the country and we aim to see the latest slums disappear in Ivory Coast within ten years, thanks to the modernization of the traditional habitat in our campaigns and accomplishments that your cities are daily theater.

The Ivorian Company for Construction and Management has built housing estates of more than 3,000 homes, it already houses 50,000 Abidjan and plans to build 80,000 homes by 1975.

From his side SOGEFIHA implements a 5000 housing program.

public and private achievements combine to give our city the face of sophistication and style that we like to recognize him. The Central Bank raises its imposing mass by side all the recent Nour Al Hayat Shopping Center;

The Ministerial Overall, the Elysee residence prelude to large companies that will mark the future great center of our capital.

The resort Air General Ban-c-African Society, Delafosse residence, the Shell building, the Hotel Ivoire, in particular bear witness to the fervor of the builders and investor confidence.

UNPRECEDENTED EFFORT FOR HEALTH AND EDUCATION

Meanwhile, Ivory Coast is proud to have accomplished in the fields of public health and education without an effort.

Fight against major diseases, hospital modernization Treichville Institute of leprosy Adzopé, anti-tuberculosis center Adjamé, Bingerville psychiatric hospital, secondary hospitals in major capitals places of sub-prefectures, creating the National School of Midwives, nurses, d`un Pasteur Institute, a National Institute of public Health is what we have done or begun to realize ourselves or with outside help we measure the immense benefits.

A similar convergence of goodwill efforts and resources are found when talking about what has been done in favor of education. We can never emphasize enough that it is for us, young hungry state and technical material progress and increasing exchanges with men fraternesis top priority. 24% of the Ivorian budget devoted to it.

The consequences of this exceptional effort for a country like ours are evident when one considers that 200,000 school children in 1960 became 400,000 in the last school year d`octobre, allowing Ivory Coast to reach 45% enrollment rate.

It is not enough for our ambition and our eagerness to progress will only be satisfied when all the son and daughters of this country will be educated, when, according to the tastes and abilities of each individual and the needs of the nation, they will be directed, after primary school, to rural activities, technical centers and vocational or secondary and technical education, the best of them accessing large specialized schools and universities.

In this key area, our effort will not slow down. Since evolontaire contribution of our farmers in the burning desire to implement the instruments of progress in their villages, build their own schools, clinics, post offices - to the participation of our equipment and buget 'capital contribution of French assistance funds and cooperation and the European development fund, is from north to south and east to west that are implanted during additional school groups, educational centers technical colleges, specialized schools large university finally frequented already 2000 students.

WE TRUST YOUTH

All these competitions, these efforts, the sacrifices, that is our youth enshrined, as we have said over - it is the future of the country, and in it lies our hope. Past generations bequeath him material and moral capital that belong to him to increase.

On this immense and exciting task of nation building to which their elders are dedicated, young people must participate increasingly We trust them. Already ia most positions of leadership and accountability in the public sector are entrusted to our cadets, parliament and the government have long since opened their their ranks, the leadership of P.D.C.I. just made them the place they deserve.

We ask only continue to do so provided that confidence that we show loyalty meet equal and unconditional acceptance of the options set by the Party and approved by the country unanimous.

It is comforting for a man of my generation see already hurry the ranks of our young teachers, engineers, technicians, officials, doctors, pharmacists. We wish with all my heart that their cohorts are always denser and welcome as a tangible sign of this new hope, all the recent accession of the first Ivorian to very difficult contest of aggregation.

Quo this example, associated with that humble activists, citizens working in their small sphere is the symbol of the union of generations animated by the same faith in the destiny of our dear Ivory Coast.

In this desire to engage all men and women of this country to the evolution of which he is the theater meets the concern not forget those whom age and social status were excluded from modern sources of knowledge. This is the ambition who chaired both training centers for rural youth to the establishment of television in our country. This incomparable instrument of diffusion is given primarily for educational purposes. It will be used for education of the peasant masses who will be accessible literacy classes, and a thousand and one own practical advice to help them better perform their duties and to participate personalize her lies to general progress.

Because we knew refuse ease policy because we agreed to sacrifice the effectiveness own love too early in this case, because we preferred the realities misleading apprences, in short, to have pushed the Africanization discount, we are happy and proud today to see that the Ivory Coast boasts one of Africa administered the most valiant, led by strong young executives, full of going, dynamic and faith, which received Having given a general education high level, were able to learn the responsibility with friends technicians - including French - personal high qualification and great human quality to which we give here a public tribute .

BUT LIFE NOT ADMITTED TO RELEASE

Now these young national cadres in good hands responsibilities that their government has entrusted to them; here they become great servants of the state, both in terms of consciousness than that of efficiency, and the work they do, especially in the public works and finance, to the general treasury , customs or areas is the daily testimony and how eloquent.

So great things have they been conducted since 1960. The Ivory Coast can proudly present the results of its action.

But life remains a constant battle that does not allow release.

The stock of our achievements and those of the inventory that the country expects us to perform + in the coming years lead us to ask ourselves whether the economic and social policy, which we have developed at length, the outline and whose resultant fill us with pride, could have been considered just if, a fortiori, that economic and social policies have been implemented without the existence of a united and stable Côte d'Ivoire, of a politically safe Ivory Coast, at peace with itself and with others.

To this question, without hesitation, we say, assuredly, no!

This is why we place this sixth anniversary of independence under the sign of unity and stability, unit and an enhanced stability.

For one unit, which will, of course, the work of several generations, but should be, as of now, our constant concern, and that should inspire all our daily actions.

Let each of us think and act Ivorian, by constant overtaking itself, and by a constant and fraternal dialogue with others, with all the others, some tribe, occupational or social class they belong.

Focus on stability also: and ours, we aspire can be the result of a policy of peace, progress, justice, equality, solidarity and fraternity.

For it is our stability we Ivorians, is happiness in peace and brotherhood.

Of course, history teaches us that, by force, it may also impose stability in countries or misery strikes, yet, at the door of the vast majority of the population. But history also teaches us that stability is precarious and irreconcilable with our ideal, and we do not want here in Ivory Coast, this stability there.

THERE IS STILL A LOT TO DO

Simply, we believe there is room for real stability, between anarchy and dictatorship, for Ivory Coast can not and will not be a dictatorship country: it is thanks to God and to us all the countries where we do not kill, the country where the fraternity is so entered the facts that are known to forgive even the gravest sins: it is, and it must be every day, the country where everyone feels solidarity with all others and wants brother among other brothers.

But to realize the great tasks ahead, we need, we, duration: time to realize our unity, time to get out of underdevelopment, time still to carry out our policy of true neutrality in trusting cooperation with all people of good will and love the same ideal of progress, freedom and brotherhood

Napoleon said: "There is nothing done, so there is still to do." And this is the moment to remember his words, because we still have much to do: yes, we have much to do to achieve our paris, paris with either our, other, but our paris on us -Same on our willingness to work, union and voluntary discipline.

The requirements that we impose assail an increased willingness to renovation, modernization and transformation. Fate has made us the builders of our country. Our ultimate hope is to pass on to those who follow us on the paths of life, an increasingly united Ivory Coast, still prosperous.

For this, we must persevere in the peaceful path of solidarity and friendship with all the loving nations of the same ideal in building a society where freedom, justice and brotherhood.

To achieve the different methods.

I can not better describe ours as the word of our dear and much lamented brother Coulibaly: "There are men who let themselves be carried away by the verbal flow. It would perhaps say to those who run so fast they learn to walk. "

Our people, fortunately, believes in the value of facts, realities and example than that of words. He believes in the wisdom and seriously, he knows the virtues of patience, stubborn work tended towards a bright lens, human triumph and happiness. He also believes in this wonderful day that will see all people of this earth finally cease to ignore, to be wary and to tear to live according to what they are, to live as brothers.

With God's help, our people will achieve its objectives and the realization of his dreams.

That solidarity is established between the nations in peace all dedicated to the progress of humanity!

What humanity to live in brotherhood finally, in true brotherhood!

Long live the Ivory Coast.

