IVORY COAST, IVORY COAST, MY DEAR FELLOW,

New Year holidays are traditionally hours of joy, it is also the time of the balance sheet. These times of joy, they are especially great for me, because here I am happily back in you after an absence that told me a lot, but when I had to make to meet a necessary health to the great tasks ahead and we will lead in the same fol.

This is the time of the annual review also was pointing out-I. And, if the separation from my people and my country was long and painful, at least it allowed me to take some decline-day judging of men and things, to review the progress made, to see exactly what advanced and which did not advance, and draw from lessons indispensable for the tasks to be undertaken.

Together we have already done a lot and we can get the results legitimate and stimulating pride. Côte d'Ivoire 1960 ... and today ... come a long way, is not it? Those who visit us, especially the hosts that we recently welcomed to mark the sixth anniversary of our independence, were struck by our progress. They have told us, and they said affileurs, which is comforting and important, because if we were the first architects of our happiness, our friends can also help to let us acquire; and trust of others merit; it is a constant mutual exchange, constantly questioned.

ASK A LOOK NEW

Justify, cause this confidence. It is - in the immediate support it with facts; that is, in addition, look at our situation, but with uncompromising realism. It is learning from the experiences, results, successes; successes and failures den. This is a fresh look on ideas taken for obvious; It is to look far when it would be so much more convenient to meet the moment. That is, if necessary, take time for new directions, not their way hard in the campaign, when, however, the road is there, drawn and tempting, with its apparent certainties.

Yes, trust is our first results; and, on this level there, the year was, all things considered, bitter satisfactory. In the Interior, national unity, for which time is irresistibly, was strengthened; and institutions, the party, the army and public services, each in regard reflects this happy development. Political stability is naturally resulted, generating confidence as guarantor of mail continuity, which only allows a state to actually exist, and a policy to develop, apply and appreciate.

If we happened to know more auspicious circumstances, our increasingly competitive production in the terms of quality and performance have been passed. Our double effort for the diversification of our products and a more complete use of our potential continued with the help of our friends: he wears, now, the promise of a healthy and vigorous expansion.

The activities of non companies were in line with expectations, marked by a rapid development for the most dynamic and best equipped of them, resulting thankfully loved another with a strengthening or a necessary readjustment taking better account of 'developments.

The promotion and development of judicial systems, administrative, medical, social and educational, which quickly with our young state, continued in accordance with the wishes of the people, the recommendations of the party and the government's promises, to the measurement of our financial and human, of course.

It is worth pointing out, for example, that the opening of thirteen new schools during the past year alone, a record for an African country.

Outside, the Ivory Coast has sought - and probably successfully - to offer the face of a brotherly country also aware of its responsibilities as its rights, faithful to its commitments, principles as his friendships, willing to dialogue, open also to any new solution, since it appears to him footprint sense, realism and seriousness.

But besides the facts, there must be room for prospects. And it is the role of the State to identify them according to current international events, thanks to his own experiences and those of others.

OUR GOAL, DEVELOPMENT

Our first objective, for several years, it is development. This is the main problem of the Ivory Coast and li is what it is, also, the main global problem, that our generation, and many of those who come after him will have to solve. The realization of such a design implies that inside and outside, in the economic field as in the social sector - particularly in the essential training - we submit everything to achieve this goal ; cares, and our first modest people, our interests and, if necessary, designs that can not remain frozen in a changing world.

Work for the development postulates at all levels, designing, making and execution are pinnate according to this goal, which is not without coordination at all times and at all levels, without making permanent consciousness of the people as its political and economic elites.

The task is exhilarating, certainly; but it is singularly difficult and complex. Because the findings of most of those who have studied this question does not argue for optimism too widespread.

In recent years, is it not evident that the overall development of economically backward countries is slower than that of industrialized nations? Can we not fear even in some cases at least, underdevelopment - such as development - generates cumulative phenomena?

Does anyone still doubt that the natural course of evolution does not causes an expansion of the dramatic gap between the rich nations and those that are not? Has it not correct that the development is not satisfied or quick solutions, no single formula, but it is rather a long-term task that requires the simultaneous use of several remedies applied in a coordinated and progressive manner and to an improvement achieved by successive?

Can we observe that some states have gained political independence for a long time, have not found until now no satisfactory solution to the problem of development and are surprised the progress made by other nations appeared later in the international arena.

It is good to think about this because ignore lei lessons dressed, certainly not the best way to prepare for the future. And in this case, faith is active and communicative as to the extent it is motivated.

It will therefore determine to what extent population growth is consistent with the growth of personal income, how it constitutes a development or stagnation factor, how far it can safely be almost entirely supported by the urban concentrations .

With a frankness and clarity that will not exclude friendship, Li will draw the attention of industrial nations on the evolution of the volume and forms of financial assistance; wonder, with these - with some of them, at least - if their current aid meets the needs of our development, the conditions of our effective integration into technological civilization, or does that translate admirably besides the moral demands of a part of their respective public opinions.

DEGRADATION THE EXCHANGE OF TERMS

It will emphasize the very worrying deterioration of terms of trade, which also global problem. And in the current context of trade liberalization and creation of sets of increasingly large and increasingly permeable, the solution of this issue among all prime, can not be in the long envisaged that worldwide. The voice of our country will join, therefore, to those of all who, with more and more insistently, demanding that, as part of a global organization of the market, the products of developing countries drowning provided some opportunities, regularly and reasonably extended in den stable and fair course.

It will question the reasons for failure of some States that preceded us on the flies of Independence; their elites have they shown enough worthy of their task? Birth and intellectual value can they still make up the moral and intellectual integrity, elevation of mind, strength of character, passion, efficiency and, above all, the civic spirit?

L’EDUCATION

It will, also, continue and accentuate the effort undertaken by officials of National Education, an effort that reflects great foresight and demands courage and vision in height. It is, then, to maintain a necessary relation between the growth of our academic achievements and those of our budgetary and human resources, improve the quality and effectiveness of our teaching but it is also to give up provide general education as the only way - or 'in any case, sufficient or preferred-transformation of our societies. This is not only to teach but also to educate, train and inform, to further integrate development training, agricultural and industrial production, that is to say, sometimes create what is still lacking, sometimes adapt if possible forms as the content of education to current and reasonably foreseeable requirements, or even if this is not sufficient to provide our country with a device educational realistic, tailored development, engine and product development, and animated by a constant concern for productivity.

EXPAND RELATIONS

Globally, while jealously protecting our sovereignty and unity, we will proceed with the expansion of our external relations.

On the African side, some events of the year and, in particular the conditions in which took place the recent conference of the Organization of African Unity were unfortunately justified fears that many felt towards opportunities quickly give our continent cohesion and weight that make it all too often lacking. Facts have amply demonstrated that those who wanted the noisiest zealots and more looking forward to this great project have jeopardized the realization by their lack of realism, their demagoguery verbose and summary, and especially by the way more and more obvious, they tried to use this generous idea to satisfy their ideological ambitions, nationalist or personal. Is this a reason to despair of the future? No, because the idea of ​​African Unity responds to our desires too unanimous and the current and future needs for not one day be translated into practice. When our dear continent have definitely broken with certain behaviors and certain methods.

For its part, Côte d'Ivoire continue to craft the framework of the Council of the Agreement and the African and Malagasy Common Organization, and cooperate as appropriate, with the groups of the same nature, which could see the day in Africa: it will thus realize concretely prepare the way for a united Africa. And it is also in the sense that it will act within the O.U.A. in arguing for negotiation, relaxation, cooperation and the gradual unification and selfless.

From all these considerations, we suggest analyzing the facts, we have, already, pull, for the immediate future, and for longer maturities, specific teachings.

For if what we have done is beautiful, what remains is still greater, more difficult too, and the choice of means, lei still is essential.

L’AGRICULTURE

What can we do ? Sar agriculturally First, the time has come to overcome resolutely experimental stage.

It is now proven that we can learn from our soil two, and sometimes three rice crops a year. It is proven that we can get cotton "allen" offering higher returns.

We know, too, that some parts of Côte d'Ivoire are favorable for tobacco growing; we know we are able to produce corn, and other commodities again, the agricultural vocation of the Ivory Coast is, thank you God, extensive.

This knowledge is a necessary step, but only a step. Now we must move forward: this rice, this cotton, this tobacco, but what we need to produce, and produce a large enough scale to meet needs not, power our industries and to be able to export them in large quantities.

Studies done on cassava, on tomatoes, yams on, for example, and the dens of our soil products demonstrate the opportunities available to us in the field of food crops. These cultures, we need the increased substantially, too. We need to develop the industries by not: and we have export the products of this industry.

INDUSTRIALIZATION

We need to bind more agriculture and industrialization because their developments are, in the long inseparable. And it is our agriculture which alone can be the solid and natural foundation of our industrialization. Again, let the economic policy of our realities, and not that of our dreams.

But Ivory Coast has in some streets of points, with very limited resources; it is relatively poor per compared to other African countries full of these mineral resources that constitute the privileged support of industrialization.

Unable to - account all current indications, at least - to base our industrialization on our basement is the generosity of our land that we will go. It is from him that we must make the most of resources, it is from him that we need to develop these industries without which it is not possible to break with underdevelopment.

Much has already been made in this direction, and it should continue weary of the increase. Different governments and a very large part of the private sector have trusted us; they are congratulated and thanked, and attach us, obtaining more conclusive results yet, to show that this trust was fully justified.

But the help we receive, indispensable though it is not enough These are the Ivorians themselves, especially young Ivorians, who must contribute to the effort of industrialization, is the island want country continues to move forward.

A YOUTH QUALIFIED

The future, it bears repeating, belongs to science and technology. And that future is Ivorian too, it is necessary that we quickly formions den engineers, technicians and researchers application-oriented realistic in their work. This is also what we expect of our youth, that the sacrifices of the state and their families, must respond with a real awareness of its responsibilities; our youth we expect it straw, through its civic sense and its high-tech, disability suffered by the Ivory Coast in certain sectors.

We said these concerns, which mount those of all the Ivorians, who are ours therefore do not conceal those arising from our membership in the African family first, and to the great universal family then.

COUNTRY BROTHERHOOD

Our membership in the African family, we repeat: Ivory Coast country of brotherhood does not wish to be, and do not pout to be an oasis of prosperity, naked security and stability middle of a desert and misery anarchy.

Now I teach you anything by telling you that the situation prevailing in Africa is worrying: the growing crisis of our continent continues, one step over economic or political situations deteriorate and no country can escape indefinitely sax consequences of this state of affairs.

Let's look around us: that problem, this African problem, seeing it is already an Ivorian problem. More and more, our sister African chariot come to us, we looking for tranquility and wellness.

Certainly, our country is that of brotherhood and we want to not deny this vocation. Those who come to us, we will welcome them as brothers and share with them what little we have. Unfortunately, our actual development is not on the scale of this immigration: we are, therefore, unable as we would have liked, to give work to all our brothers, unfortunately, while for our part we are committed, with encouraging results, to remember in our villages terms of possible world, in Abidjan, in particular, the number of our brothers nans work is increasing. This raises a number of issues that we must strive to find together and acting with the assistance of our external friends compliant responses to our best interests and while remaining true to our ideal of always, that is to say solidarity and human brotherhood.

Indeed, our good will is not enough: the developed countries discuss the fate of our neighbors. They help them more effectively to overcome their difficulties. And, I think, responsible brothers States will create conditions that will justify our call.

So we are fully supportive of other African countries and we have a duty to strengthen every day to the best of our possibilities.

SOLIDARITY WITH THE WORLD

But we are on the other interdependent world; we also belong to the great universal family, and create these links, nowadays, the consequences of increasingly obvious and increasingly direct.

We can no longer remain indifferent to what is happening around us. Today, if we go to him, the world comes to us and that is imposed on us.

As the most authoritative voices than ours cossent to rise for a much needed peace, in particular, African countries if they want to catch up.

It is time, indeed, that the forces, which are fighting the empire of the world, renounce impose their ambitions and do get into the facts of peaceful coexistence.

It is time that each renounces impose, or all of humanity, the scheme of his choice.

It is time, finally, that tolerance only compatible with the inevitable interdependence becomes the golden rule of humanity so do not doubt, disorders in which the world is suffering for over twenty years, all these divisions, as deplorable and dangerous, will diminish and then disappear.

Meanwhile, and to contribute to the transformation of the general state of mind, we need to "cultivate our garden." That every Ivorian firmly believe that by working, participating in progress, the development of his country, in affirming its solidarity with its African brothers, and remembering that "we are born to love and not to hate, "it serves the cause of peace!

" I TRUST "

Let every Ivorian, qu'attachement what he feels for his own principles and its own methods, respects the experiences of others: its tolerance promotes relaxation, expand their horizons and increase the field of knowledge!

Yes, our struggle, our new battle will be long and hard, but the results we have already obtained are likely to encourage us. Troubling questions appear that we have clearly asked, because reflection and hindsight we have invited, because we want the time deadlines is not that of the disenchantment, but the success and happiness of man Ivorian. These issues will be discussed by you, your representatives, and released solutions will be applied by the leaders that you have given.

Because our country is Ivory Coast, rich in its results, its countless good wishes, his valuable friendships, because we Ivorians, used tough fights but victorious, I trust.

I trust and I associate my joy to your own wish that the new year brings us, thank God, that connection wait for you from it, for yourself, for those who are dear to our Ivory coast beloved, for our Africa.

That the Almighty, above all, do we not household peace, the peace that we want with all our soul for all, for it alone will lead us to universal brotherhood, our aspiration to always.

