I wish every success to their Congress. Should keep in freedom, take their resolutions that seem good for their union, elect the office they want. We do not want to interfere in their business affairs all that we ask them is to take into account our realities and the interests of the country by exerting their action in the positive context that the Party and the government their these were the words that kept President Houphouet recently, while taking place in Abidjan, the annual conference of the National Union of Students and Flexes of Ivory Coast, single union organizing the student youth of our country. Today students have completed their work. They stopped their trade decisions for a year and elected their new officers. Most feel they have worked freely and democratically. Which is a good thing.

I know of no African "totalitarian" the word "student congress" is long dead and buried. It was Hon eligible and the heroic days before independence. Today more question. Other African governments admit occasionally after they got drunk or good circumstances, in recent years, is regular thing to attend the annual congress of the UNFCL But this event is not that one aspect of the desire of self Ivorian sides to combine their efforts with those of the intellectual youth of the country within a democratic framework, frank and loyal.

"LOVE WITHOUT MEASURE"

En effet, here connait, quelque peu, the Chef de l'Etat, the President Houphouet-Boigny, sait que la jeunesse Constitue for him at obsession. The market qu'elle hear confiante vis-à-vis d'elle-même et vis-à-vis des autorités et pouvoir au pays du tout entier. The qu'elle veut être de brillantes études dans des conditions Materielles et morales normal. The shape qu'elle veut de nos conscience réalités et qu'elle feel déjà publi. The market qu'elle hear solidaire other citoyens du pays et qu'elle ne soit pas que les lacunes de thereon.

"Really, President Houphouet is a father to us. I think the same too generous, too good with us. He gives without measure. I'm not sure that this generosity makes service always some "students" at the resident himself and the country, "recently told me an Ivorian student, worthy of the wire us a doctoral student ... i betting in the immeasurable love the Head of State with regard to the Ivorian youth who had the privilege of being educated. This admirable student, realistic and serious, added: "The Ivorian students in France are the most favored of all African students abroad. Most are fellows, and those who do not regularly receive valuable assistance ... "

This young Ivorian intellectual was there a finding which each is. Today, conscious. For my part, I just followed President Houphouet during his European tour: Genesis in Bonn and Berlin to Paris. Official visits and public receptions are not the only activities of the resident during his travels, that goes without saying. There are, of course, all these contacts and economic talks without which the country is only too slowly. But there also and especially to the President, the more or less intellectual scattered Ivorian youth in Europe and often left to itself.

I saw the Ivorian student groups around President Houphouet Paris, Bonn and Berlin, as I had seen it two years ago in Brussels. It's a sight to see because very rewarding, not always because of the high quality of what is being said, but because, surely, of fraternal and free way with which we exchange views: because also very different reactions of students.

"IVORIANS PATRIOTS IN GERMANY"

"These young Ivorians are true patriots. It looks like they were fortunately contaminated with courage, professionalism and patriotism of the Germans ... These are young people encouraged. They are aware of our problems and our difficulties and strive to make a useful day in the country. They are true ambassadors of Ivory Coast in areas where they study, "we said the Houphouet resident on July 7 in Bonn out of the room where he had just received a large delegation of Ivorian students Federal Republic of Germany. I remember a long time of this interview, which began at 22h (after significant official reception), was scheduled to end at 2 am, while the official visit program resumed at 8 am 30;

So saying after the meeting, the Head of State seemed to feel great satisfaction. You could feel his love of young redouble their intensity. It was like he saw in these "patriots" an extension of himself.

WHY ?

What justifies this attitude of the President with regard to young people? It is not just in our eyes, to see demagogic or paternalist effects. Simply rub the Head of State to be convinced that his paternal and generous feelings for the young and the people all around are deeply sincere. This man loved by his people he still needs demagoguery to keep power as some leaders? That not the point! What haunts President Houphouet and which is, in fact, his only obsession is the continuity of his work over the future. But this continuity is only possible with voluntary membership and understood of the rising class, young. This idea found elsewhere, already a large place in practice. The Head of State does not he told me a year ago: "The Ivorian youth, reasonably, can not be the policy of Côte d'Ivoire antechamber. She participates freely with his elders in the work of national construction. Look in our ministries, our public services and our embassies: the proportion of young people under 35 is the highest. How can you best show that we trust the young and we trust them? "

Just open your eyes to be convinced of this reality. Yet the experience of 61-62 years would scare "Old" Young seemed to have disappointed this time plots. But when we make the idea of ​​an effective succession leitmotif, nothing can scare or stop the encouragement and confidence of youth.

DIALOGUE

"We need our young people to have confidence in themselves and have confidence in us, their elders. They should have confidence in the bright future of Côte d'Ivoire if the stability and peace are saved. Young people must know our difficulties and problems. We have to explain our action and gather their views, "said recently the President in an interview with Fraternité Matin. And he added: "We instituerons regular and frequent meetings with the students, all students, Ivory Coast and where dialogue is very free, open and frank. The discussions will be fraternal and made in a spirit of full democracy and without any fear ... "

These words of the Houphouet resident, we would agree on the risers of all African leaders are not empty words. Such encounters students, Ivory Coast and France, are innumerable. There are endless receptions Avenue Raymond Poincaré in Paris, in the premises of the Embassy of Ivory Coast in France. We still have in mind the days of January 1965 truths that took place at the National Assembly in Abidjan and that journalists have dubbed "The Three Glorious Days" because they now fall as historical in annals of student history of our country. But they opened, in fact, that the ever more crowded way of a permanent and open dialogue. Meetings between the President and the students at Presidency Palace lasted, you know, all night ... We also know that the Abidjan Ivorian students take part in the discussions of the National Council of the Party sessions where all find themselves the social strata of the country ... in short, here the student is informed citizen that participates in the nation's life where he has his say.

Yamoussoukro and the meeting we are witnessing today and which is held the day after the student conference, following also the long stay of the President of the Republic in Europe, and all on the eve of the celebration of National Day takes, in our view, a very special character. Indeed, at a time when our country African encounter huge difficulties in the flow of our products at remunerative prices; at a time when we must increasingly assertive in refusing the "unconditional" wherever it comes from and whatever the price: when the most attractive schemes through crises and depressing disturbing, while Africa, which seeks through the growing unrest and instability, is cruelly confronted with the harsh economic realities, it is time that every citizen, young or not; illiterate or intellectual, is clearly determined and take responsibility. The truth must be told to Yamoussoukro, without fear and without passion, like family.

WHERE IS DEMOCRACY ?

As all the world's intellectuals, African students are zealots of democracy, western motion the effervescent middle of their students has instilled in them, which is not a bad thing. But in Africa, a question arises: Sekou Toure Houphouet, Tsiranana Nasser, through other schemes more or less clearly defined, where exactly democracy in Africa? Everyone, to answer this question, let certainly speak his heart or his passion. But we need an honest answer and courageous to such a question because it determines our actions and our attitudes. For our part, in countries where 80% of the population are ignorant and beignent often still in the primary era, it seems to us difficult to give a precise meaning to the Western notion of democracy. But our plans are democratic. Suffrage is universal in our states as elsewhere. But this is, in our opinion, that part which will fill, honestly, that progressively, qu'avanceront evolution and instruction. But for this "democratic" framework is a "whited sepulcher", define another democracy that has to be contained. A possible and effective democracy. We believe for example that in a country where, aware of this problem, the leaders do not abuse of power: governing with the maximum of justice; looking at any time the general interest rather than meet - too easily - their gluttonous appetites and selfish on the backs of people who can not but; seek with those who can talk to them, especially the intellectuals of the country, a permanent dialogue, fair and open; such leaders can practice a democracy, it must be said, beyond and universal suffrage and other Western executives. This practice seems to us to be that exerted by the Ivorian regime in recent years. He is honest, courageous and just let it be said. It is difficult to meet elsewhere in Africa such an attitude of the leaders in power. Often tribalism and regional factions are formed which perpetually threatens the regime and often force, by the end, the army to take control of the situation. This plague, African authorities should heal by becoming open, modest and accessible to the people. That defined our way, simple and naive, what must be, at the moment, democracy in Africa. If this is done in an African state, there is no reason that the intellectual youth feel frustrated, misunderstood and exerts a negative action against public authorities. The Ivorian example seems very worthy of our reflection.

FALSE AND TRUE STUDENT IN EUROPE

That said, there is no intention to pay special attention to all that say those who have the students name in Europe. There are some days, a young Ivorian intellectual - a real student - told me: "The aid granted by the President to some Ivorians who wander in France who wear the perpetuity students, does not make us service nor the country forward. We must have the courage to say: there are fake and real students. Certainly there are non-scholarship students regularly enrolled and successful in serious schools, such students can be helped, because they will be useful one day in the country. But there is a group of young people that I can not define or qualify and abusively taking advantage of the generosity of the President. These people should be exposed and brought to Côte d'Ivoire, as they do a disservice to themselves and to our country abroad ... ".

The thesis of this serious student is shared by many others concerned about the future of the country. Moreover, in Bonn, recently the Head of State himself said to the students: "Help us to persuade those of you who are never going to return home. There labor for everyone in Ivory Coast ... "

It is that President Houphouet never wants to solve such human problems by force. Persuasion there would be enough and ultimately more effective. An urgent appeal should be launched in the "students" of this category: in their interest and in that of the country, they must join the work where no sheep is denied.

At a time when truth and dialogue must guide all our national action, it is good that these things are said to put everyone at ease. This can only strengthen mutual confidence, so fraternity, national cohesion and promise a better future for each and Ivory Coast whole.

The eighth "groove" that tomorrow we start the construction should be done this honesty cement, realism, truth and brotherhood. It will be even stronger.

