Ivorian, Ivorians, My dear compatriots,

Daloz, the capital of the Midwest dynamic, soon will take place the celebrations in which we celebrate this day forever memorable, where the Ivory Coast entered into the family of sovereign nations. On the eve of the seventh anniversary of our independence meditate a moment together on the future of our dear country.

We live in a world that knows many political confrontations, economic, ideological and unfortunately also military. Each passing day teaches us the inexorable nature of competition in all areas and shows that too often the weak and isolated are being promised to the dark fate of the vanquished of life.

And yet, despite the tragic spectacle and heartbreaking that we so abundantly offers daily news, despite the very serious concerns that capture any observer of the international situation, despite the convulsions which agitate Africa in many places, it is a message confidence that I would bring you.

Yes, believe me, I am as much as anyone aware of the serious dangers facing the world, but I also know the reasons for hope, and I wish each and every one of you share with me.

Confidence in ourselves first. The acknowledgments of our recent past, the certainties of the present as well as future prospects make it more legitimate.

We do not ride the clouds. I reminded al over again: we want realistic and our reasons for believing in us based on the facts, which I will quote just the most significant time. This insurance, we also pulsons in the certainty of joining the entire country to the efforts of its political leaders. The most vivid demonstrations of many of our unity and our cohesion year were recently provided: first and foremost the unity of students and finally realized students, consolidated, integrating them into the national life under construction, with home now, a greater awareness of their duties vis-à-vis this country of which they are both the hope and certainty, the certainty of a better life in peace and freedom : then when clemency came to end last consequences of events, which for a time disturbed the usual serenity of our country.

Ivory Coast will not have too much of all her children to pursue what remains one of its most legitimate struggles: the struggle for economic independence.

To achieve these ends there can be no question of acting alone. Also that within our borders we are each attached to his countrymen and the world can we count on strong support.

TRUST AND FREEDOM

By asking to share my confidence in these external friendships, I state by even one of the fundamental axioms of our political action. It is called loyalty to the principles that have always guided us. You certainly know, but in a time when ignorance and more bad faith too often distorted by the most solemnly declared intentions, it seems opportune to me to recall once again.

We are fervent lovers of freedom, all our past, which is designed background with glorious history of P.D.C.I.R.D.A., bears witness. Freedom for our people and our country, freedom for each nation to choose who steal him seem best suited to its own conditions.

This spirit of tolerance that animates us we ask in return, we do proof to us.

It is understood in these terms why the permanent rule of our action is summed up in the dialogue, fair confrontation of points of view, even antagonisms, to arrive at balanced solutions, the necessary compromises without which life, stripped of any ethical, n is more than fighting dominated the strongest or the most devoid of scruple.

The attachment to the rules of thought and action that in any event we determine based on actual Ivorians interest and in the interest of peace, which in our mind borrow closely parallel tracks. For peace, whose supreme good too beings are still to this day remains the private condition of the harmonious development of the land of men. To save or strengthen Ivory Coast will always be at the forefront of the willing.

For its part, the Republic Ivorian justly proud of the trusting and close relations with a growing number of nations.

LOYALTY TO FRIENDSHIP

Allow me to greet especially the Board of brothers Entente countries and the African and Malagasy Common Organization, patiently working for the common good, knowing that the ideals that inspired the founders of the Organization of African Unity Organization which is our mind at all, will be realized on the day will be gone sterile quarrels retardant harmonious development and economic progress of our states.

While remaining true to his oldest friends Ivory Coast has, for seven years, acquired new. We welcome as a sign of our good political and economic health and the close links established and we hope that the efforts of technical cooperation, cultural, economic and financial amplify in the legitimate interests of all parties involved. Already we can congratulate highly significant results obtained by bi-lateral and multilateral cooperation.

The United Nations, this essential meeting place that allows a young nation like ours to make its voice heard in the global concert, we bring the support enjoyed how of its specialized agencies.

For its part, the Economic European Community whose development fund participates largely to the huge task of our modernization, proves an ideal partner, both by the scale of its aid by adapting its methods and procedures to the solution of our problems.

Certainly, this does not mean that nothing will darken a particular perspective, I do not conceal and will return in a moment.

In the field of bi-lateral relations, Ivory Coast is proud to meet understanding and assistance both from France, who stands at the forefront of countries that we are helping, than from the Federal Republic of Germany, where I have to perform an unforgettable journey, a prelude to even closer ties and and with our other partners in the Economic European Community.

I could care not to forget the great Republic girlfriend across the Atlantic, the United States of America, who, despite their immense responsibilities, give us ample evidence of their understanding of our problems.

The many friendly countries that contribute so effectively to the harmonious construction of our country, and in the most diverse fields, excuse me not to mention them all, all are equally entitled to our gratitude.

But, I said, without denying his old friends, Ivory Coast aspires to tie in new and hopefully that will materialize the promises contained in the reports recently linked with the Soviet Union.

Ivory Coast sincerely hope that in this peaceful competition for the development of friendly add up each other's contributions. She will welcome as it has done so far, thankfully, pending the expected date, where it can, in turn, deal itself needs for its own development, providing, thus, an increased contribution to overall prosperity.

NO CONDITIONS

But I want to proclaim with all the gravity implied by that statement, our country will never accept from anyone, assistance which would subject to political conditions.

For our honor and the honor of those who help us respecting us, we never will fail this requirement of our national consciousness.

Who could doubt that the way or we are committed without failure and without compromise is one that is best for our country? The results achieved since 1960 prove it eloquently. There is a year I dressais sufficiently evocative record of our march forward.

Today I can assure you that our will to progress not blunted by the results aspires to further overruns.

If we take a quick look at the twelve previous months, that pride of motives and reasons to persevere.

For the first time, in 1966, the traffic of the port of Abidjan - true barometer of our business - exceeded four million tons.

Agriculture, the primary source of economic development continues its renewal. Besides the traditional export crops where the imperative of quality is needed more than ever, the latest achievements continue their progression. This year 1967 will in the plan palm create 9,000 hectares of new palm plantations and the construction of two additional treatment plants.

The actions in favor of the coconut start of a promising way.

The results already achieved in the cultivation of cotton out prospects as vast as promising. In the food area, our laboring peasant populations, as always, responded to the solicitations which they were subject. The results obtained in rice production possible to consider not only a significant reduction or end of our imports, but also in the near future, the export of wheat.

The industrialization of the country constantly progressing. It would be tedious to list all the creations and extensions that fly day or are under construction.

Suffice it to recall that the progress achieved both food industries as textiles industry, the timber industry relied on a production that maintains its high level, or the chemical sector.

In the field of equipment Ivory Coast sees continue spectacular achievements. The effort for habitat intensifies throughout the coast. And DALOA, promoted to town 3 of the Ivory Coast by its remarkable development and exemplary modernization, is justly proud of having made disappear the first, slums.

July 1 saw the circulation of the second bridge of Abidjan, we do not know whether to admire most the technical data or the aesthetic success.

The thermal power Vridi will be commissioned next year, as the new terminal with our capital can boast as one of the most beautiful monuments of a city already rich in successes.

At the same time the social destinations to buildings or industrial arise in Bouake, which justifies every day rank second metropolis of the country.

The road effort continues, the railway is being renovated, the port extends and diversifies its infrastructure, equipment, post and telecommunications multiplies and modernized, the Radio and Television performing technical advances that bring gradually able to fulfill their mission of information, culture and entertainment, Public Health and Education, permanent objects of our attentive care, increase their settlements and modernize their facilities. The South West of the country, which arouses so much hope is already the subject of numerous surveys and studies, which will succeed immediately tangible achievements.

Le Progres SOCIAL

Our economic development, basic social progress and human, do not slow down. The Government has proposed, and the National Assembly adopted on 8 July. "Instrument Guidance for economic growth and social progress for the 1967-1970 period", that is to say the Law Plan. Furthermore, a triennial Program law of public investment will come.

Also, a Framework Law on General Education; Agricultural Education and Vocational Education will be presented before 31 December 1967. Finally There is provided a set of development programs to enable a balanced and harmonious development of the whole entire nation.

Given what we have already achieved, both by ourselves and thanks to external aid both public and private, we could indulge in optimism without reservation. It would demonstrate a very guilty lightness. For if our balance is positive, it exists nonetheless many unfavorable factors, it behooves us to appreciate to better ward off the adverse effects.

In the political order, almost every day, we bring the sad echo of the world's rifts that divide the ideologies and interests.

The fanaticism of each adds to the intransigence of others to make it more accessible this haven we dream that humanity can finally devote themselves to exciting tasks of progress.

On the economic struggle is no less harsh and we suffer in our body defending the unfortunate repercussions.

We are witnessing for several years to a progressive deterioration of the so-called terms of trade: that is, our export products are selling cheaper in foreign markets and we can not - until to this day - influence price fluctuations. Meanwhile, capital goods - manufactured goods we import - see their prices follow, no less steadily upward curve. This perilous situation for the fragile economies of developing countries would result - if there was remedied - with tragic consequences.

What good, some might think, what good produce more and better, diversify crops, industrialize if one leads to market rife intangible laws that inexorably devote suppliers of raw materials or semi products finished the role of degrading underpaid producers, forever doomed to remain in the proletariat economically dominated by the strongest Nations?

Also, once again, I appeal to the major industrialized countries to realize the seriousness of this problem and to contribute to the organization of a world market for major export products. This is work of justice and, consequently, the work of peace.

We wish with all my heart that our financial discipline continued effort every day, in our collaborative planning policy, our incentives to private national and foreign investment, in our continuous construction and enthusiastic of the Ivorian state, responds understanding economically significant nations. In a world where the interests of interpenetration asserts itself every day, they contribute thereby to the establishment of a distant yet balance between continents.

If manifest good will and spirit of solidarity that we expect rich countries, so, my fellow Americans, reason to hope and believe in our future will materialize further.

Meanwhile, we must walk the path of the future.

The unity and solidarity

For this remain united in solidarity, eagerly participate in nation-building, fi do generational differences, ethnic origin, communion in the same passion for our country and the ideals to which he remains forever attached:

Respect for human dignity,

And the love of freedom and peace.

Ivorian, Ivorians

We live in a difficult and dangerous world, we do not want can keep us out: we must be vigilant and confident, also because our balance sheet invites us, and because we are united, organized and workers.

Yes, we have confidence in our beautiful Ivory Coast, as our friends have confidence in ourselves and in it.

Let us remain faithful to our principles and patiently waiting for the law, justice, peace and brotherhood finally triumph.

Young and old, rural and city, vow to make, for our work in unity and discipline, our beloved Côte d'Ivoire, every day more beautiful, more prosperous, more united, more fraternal.

"LONG LIVE THE IVORY COAST"

