IVORY COAST, IVORY COAST, MY DEAR FRIENDS,

With Christmas and the holidays, the time is now to joy. In a few moments, with the new year, it will be the revival. So, like every year, each reread the tour soon page: everyone, hopefully, will examine the content of that he will again fill.

And next to those millions of personal balance sheets, there, too, the one we used to do every year together: that of the Ivorian nation, this Ivorian nation is all Ivorians, who all Ivorian, but that is also something more: a will to live together the good and bad times: a will to build together something that, at the same time, we express, we exceed and guide us.

For a year, the Ivory Coast lived free; she lived in peace: she lived in stability. "Mundane circumstances," say those in which "the happy people have no history." But these benefits are they so popular that we can not commend us to enjoy?

When the highest political and spiritual authorities of this world call for peace from their vows and prayers: When, however, the war rages, here and there, with its procession of mourning and misery; when tyranny and oppression even crush entire regions; when rivalries, egoism and taste uncertain adventures and poor override the best interests; when, in short, peace, stability and freedom are denied the world closer to us again, very close to us, on the floor of our Africa, why not rejoice have tasted it for the eighth year row?

WE LOOK FORWARD

So yes, let us rejoice; without reservation ; because it is important; because freedom, peace and inner calm, it is we, and we alone, who have deserved them, which got them, and We strengthened.

Our work, confidence and we inspire our policy, as this depends on us, Ivorians, Ivorian, and only us. That allows us to mitigate the fate and effects of factors or decisions that are beyond us.

Again, again, we were able to raise us up to our responsibilities. However, crop failure boded May the course of the past year. But the economy of our country was able to overcome this handicap. Better still, we continued our march forward; slower than some particularly favorable years, perhaps; but clearly, however. And this is very encouraging.

CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT

Our foreign trade has increased, economic indices amounted: Growth in industrial production has never denied-and the flow of external assistance was maintained.

At their elders out of schools and universities in France and elsewhere, joined or will join thousands of young people attending our schools, our colleges, our University which takes shape quickly. All will be better equipped to undertake the tasks that await heavy, alive hopes of a more Ivorian Ivory Coast.

And 1967 saw the Party and the Government take, confirm and accentuate decisions affecting the future; whether, notably in the area of ​​infrastructure, the enlargement of the bases of our economy or that of priority, difficult, courageous but necessary, that the future has been solemnly granted.

Here are the promises of harvests, coupled with flow generally favorable outlook, permitting, again, the best hopes. This could be the time of easy optimism. It should be, rather, that of reflection.

More than ever, we need to "keep right"; beyond the immediate and everyday life, which this year come in pomp auspices, there is the permanence of our goals and our situation. Let us, therefore, aware of our limitations, still wanting to back the.

Let us realize that the life of a country - and, even more, that of a developing country - requires a permanent choice. A choice between good and bad? Yes, certainly. But also, and at the same time, between the good and the better, between useful and necessary, between the present and the future, between these and those.

Yes, the selection and rejection are and must be everywhere and at all times, at all levels and in all fields; grow is to know and that is want to choose. That is to say no to the facility is to know to stop to judge and decide; is to know the fullness of life of free men, and do not be satisfied with incomplete pleasures.

And today, more that there are eight, because we have the experience of independence, because we are freer, who sees that each of our objectives correspond apparently more channels and yet, one and only one of them can lead them?

So, my friends, my brothers, let's see together for a few minutes more of what it is. Let us know what we want; and what we do not want.

OUR CHOICE

We want a modern Ivory Coast, we want men of the 20th century, we want technically, economically and socially always closer to the most prosperous nations.

But we, too, that beyond the appearances of a modern country, our Ivory Coast know, in depth, a kind of development suited to the nature of his men and his things, transforming his face without alienate his soul.

We want to move forward, certainly, but without, however, deny our past, without turning back to those of our forms of civilization, which are our originality and the world has great need us I know.

We want an economy adapted to our time, we want competitive industries inside as outside. But we do not want to introduce in our country a fatal rift between a bright spearhead and a timber that would support not want us, so that our campaigns go in step with our cities, in particular, that the effectiveness of our engineers and our workers meet the productivity of our farmers and all agricultural sector, on which our current prosperity and future chances of a harmonious, continuous and sustainable.

We want children educated, able to understand the world and to shape them.

But do we want a statement, which is not matched by a corresponding training? No. Do we want a development of minds, which is not a doubling of heart enrichment and strengthening of legal structures? No.

We want children prepared for their future tasks: Certainly.

FOR OUR CAMPAIGNS

But at the same time, do not we need to avoid depriving our country of talent they need, equally, if not more, that our cities? Do we need not make them more attractive here? Should we not we, in this area as in others, further linking our efforts with our means? Our school system need not be designed according to our legitimate aspirations, but also, first, according to our needs, that is to say the needs of our fields, the needs of our factories and , also according to those of our offices and our hospitals?

We plan to use, right now, and within reason, the fruits of our labor: and this is natural.

But whatsoever without compromising the harvest of tomorrow, we need to prepare - some difficulties or constraints that we were experiencing - building on the good years to invest and reinvest unabated.

For enjoying the moment, does not mean that we can sacrifice the future or doubt in our acts, of a country that gives us so much: who gives us so much to us all. Ivorian origin or adoption.

We accept ambition because it does not exclude devotion to the public interest and our country is in great need of initiatives, ideas, innovation, dynamism and emulations friendly.

But we deplore the rivalry, and we refuse appetites, whatever the level at which they occur.

OPEN ON THE OUTER

free and liberal country, ours is wide open to the outside, by its nature, by inclination and by reason. It will remain so, what it is, and fraternal welcoming to all those who respect our political and economic independence their rule of action in Ivory Coast.

Welcoming everyone, how do we not, first, to our less fortunate brothers, who among us give as much as they receive? Ivory Coast will remain a land of refuge, dialogue and exchange.

But probably will we, alas! adjust our home opportunities to those in our development, as required by our interests, solidarity, however, those of our neighbors.

We want, as a united Africa alone can actually play a role in our world of great sets. Moreover, it does not suffice us to want it and to proclaim: we proved it by taking our part in the creation and development of several organizations, which are enzymes and promising drafts of unity and the necessary test stands in common life.

But what we do not want, however, is any unit. That is to say, a unit made at any price, were it to that of a hard-won freedom; a hastily unity achieved without these steps that we believe and we know essential, both in space and in time in terms of objectives.

Yes, everyone, at all levels, in all areas, we have the right to be proud and reasonably optimistic.

But everyone, at all levels and in all areas, we have the urgent duty to be vigilant, measured and imbued with the scale of the difficulties that we are still waiting.

Indeed, our development, our freedom and our happiness we are not and we will not be acquired once and for all, before long.

HAPPINESS OF MAN IVOIRIAN

Persuade us that the development of a country is not a matter of years, but of generations of men and women leaders, walking at the same pace towards a single goal.

Our development is designed based on an unchanging goal: happiness Ivorian man. But it is also the Ivorian man and only he who will build his own happiness.

For it is not possible development, that is to say, no happiness growing for us and our children if we do not have in us if we do not grow in us, a personal development will ; and if we do not express in acts that inner flame; that is to say, if we are not looking at each moment, the best from the good, sustainable compared to the passenger, the less costly in human, material and financial resources in relation to what is more. In short, if we do not know weigh and choose.

It is not, either, development and possible happiness if our country first, but if Africa and the world also, do not live in peace.

THE WORLD AND WE

We are members of the African family; and members of the universal family. As such, "Nothing that is human can be foreign to us." We can not remain external to what is going on not far from us and elsewhere in the world: the grief, suffering and the ruins of these unfortunate countries of the world around them all, since men are brothers and solidarity; and since the development is ultimately peace in its positive form, the illuminated peace, vibrant, dynamic.

In recent days, a voice, even in his prestigious volonaire humility, addressed to "all men of good will"; that of His Holiness Pope Paul VI, stressing the importance of "Fundamental" Peace, a "fair and balanced peace in the sincere recognition of the rights of the human person and indépendace of each nation."

How not to be associated with this pathetic appeal? And how our Ivory Coast, fraternity earth did she not join in all countries and to all men of goodwill who will make the first day of January, 1968, the day of peace?

Ivorians Ivorians, my brethren, it is a difficult life and inspiring men and free women and aware that I invite you, once again, at this moment.

I do, because I think it is necessary and because the esteem and affection are expressed, first, by the difficult requirement of truth, whether of the State of the Coast Ivory and very worrying situation, which prevails at the moment, Africa and in many parts of the world.

"I AM CLOSE TO YOU"

One you have freely chosen as a guide and strives after independence, to provide with your competition enthusiastic happiness of the country said this evening: "I am close to you, close to your suffering, your near joys near your hopes, and wholeheartedly, to one and all, I offer my wishes for the new year; pray to God together, to grant us the strength to fight hand in hand to make our dear Ivory Coast, still more beautiful; always happier, and ever more worthy of his destiny.

Let us pray to give to the world and all of us peace: that of arms, and also that of the heart and of the mind. "

"It is deliberately, in an end-of year which wants general, we did not want to deliver the encrypted details of our activities or the menu of our worries.

But I have to answer questions if relevant.

Despite progress in many areas realize, that we can all be justly proud, the country is experiencing two serious concerns.

Rents are above the means of small grants, this sad situation affects unfortunately the majority of our workers.

At the last school year, despite the construction of thirteen schools in a single year record for a small developing country, a number of our méritaints children could not find places in our secondary schools.

We will try in the coming months to address this sad state of affairs.

Problems of resources and social justice issues facing us throughout the national construction.

And social development effort and more particularly management training, two necessities or two imperatives that we absolutely must reconcile.

FIRST SOCIAL

Expand to support social, train competent managers to accelerate development.

We do not lose sight of this double concern.

The Minister of Finance and Economic Affairs and colleagues of Planning and Agriculture, will you soon on the airwaves of Radio Television encrypted details about the development.

Suffice it to give you an outline of the development policy.

The Act on Plan 116 billion investment in three years is running. We fully realize the established program.

The budget that has been voted includes 43 billion for operations and 20 billion for investment - proportion rarely achieved elsewhere and reflects our commitment to development - impressive result achieved by compressing the operating budget. A substantial reduction of the earmarked funds hardware will add other measures such as compression directions in some departments and that in a dual concern for efficiency and economy, the significant decrease in function indemnities excluding all others.

TWO BIG DREAMS

In addition the 1968 will see two big dreams we are pursuing for nearly seven years become realities:

The port of San Pedro with the related road infrastructure ... 8 billion 600 million.

It is finally the rational development of certainty of this vast and rich region hitherto untapped.

- The dam Koussou with the American loan, soon complemented by the European debt, especially Italian and our own financial effort is accelerated industrialization by increasing our energy resources, reducing the cost of kilowatt besides other significant benefits: fishing, irrigated agriculture, tourism - cost: 25 billion.

But we should add several private investment projects which are subject to our review.

San Pedro, Kossou, three-year plan, private investment, it is work for thousands of our compatriots, who will be on construction sites, in factories, but most important fact those of our fields.

You see that international cooperation, law-century fully in our favor because we knew the merit of our work and our reliability. A massive action of France as technicians in funds that gradually adds more and more of our friends, including the US and Europe. That all must be recognized.

SOLE REMEDY

In Ivory Coast it is not enough to diagnose a bad, the important thing is to arrive at an effective remedy.

We all know that we live in an underdeveloped country with means unfortunately still very limited both in technical and economic means that financial executives. But we want to get out of this underdevelopment.

The cure: one, but fortunately at hand - work in unity and discipline. That is why I invite all men and women home.

