Dear compatriots,

It is now the turn of Abengourou to organize events and festivities that mark lei, as throughout the Ivory Coast, but with more solemnity and splendor - our national holiday.

Capital of a prosperous department, Abengourou is more than the capital for a day: our presence at all in this town shows the importance of the Ivory Coast from the inside of the Ivory Coast planters , merchants, ranchers and contact officials who, through their work and their patriotism, have helped make our country a country where it is so good.

lei, as in all regions of Côte d'Ivoire, our economic development is part of the daily reality: everyone perceives the less strongly perhaps he would like, certainly, but so increasingly evident, however, and more clear that some African countries. With a remarkable combination of effort and devotion of our traditional production increase to the point of correcting to some extent the effects of falling prices, while their range is widening.

It does not go months without here and there, a new site comes alive without a new school or a new clinic opens or enlarges without a new locality is transformed . Yes, progress is everywhere, in all fields, at individuals or the community; and this progress is designed, prepared, implemented and operated with this desire for information with this desire for dialogue and the requirement for membership, entering the traditions of our country in those of our party, the glorious Party Democratic Ivory Coast and those of our young public service, ever closer to the people it seeks to understand, to love, to serve and to raise.

A country that rises: a tree growing

Should I point out that our trust capital is increasing year by year, of trust embodied by a growing number of investors, with the forthcoming completion of two major projects: the Kossou and the port of San Pedro, loans granted to our country, including - and this is very important for an under-developed various - the borrowing made on the international financial market.

Capital trust we all have a duty to earn more each day by the stability and seriousness in work.

Who, in this day of general rejoicing, only rejoices in all this, all these achievements and this exciting certainty: the Ivory Coast, 7 Nout since 1960 we are celebrating today has grown ; it has steadily become more welcoming and sweet to everyone, Ivorians and Ivorian.

However, our present joy today strengthens feelings of individuals: relief that we all feel, knowing that our dear Ivory Coast has avoided the troubles experienced by many countries in recent months the globe.

The news agencies of the countries we witness a superficial friendship were quick to announce general strikes in Ivory Coast, with the sad procession of disorders that are known.

May we know our dear Ivory Coast, a country of dialogue or the worst difficulties can find happy solutions through a frank and fruitful discussion between workers and employers.

The strength of our institutions, the clear awareness of our historical responsibilities and especially our sense of the general interest have easily prevailed during the past weeks, conducted on an irresponsible or unconscious handle.

Between the political stability of a democratic regime and interested games factions, the Ivorian people did not hesitate.

Nor did he hesitate between an economic doctrine that allows our country to make the best use of its resources, and anachronistic reveries, undermining confidence in the Ivory Coast in éloigneraient investors to reduce its alone and insufficient potential and would soon to embark on the path of decline.

For their part, the vast majority, Ivory Coast workers know how to choose the benefits and assurances of a steady job and gradually improved and they know repel demagogic facilities which in a few months would generate higher costs of life, poor sales, unemployment and drain needed foreign capital to more hospitable country just waiting, perhaps, that our mistakes to attract.

Finally, the people of Ivory Coast knows how to parallel the sacrifices of farmers subject to uncertainties and the rigors of the international market of products and appetites or the impatience that some privileged spread shamelessly claiming to represent the Ivorian youth, God thank you nourishes, we all know, other ambitions.

Does this mean that everything is gained, everything perfect, that nothing can or should be corrected, enhanced, modified, improved and considered? Is this to say that the stability and growth are not only necessary but sufficient? certainly not.

A country that student is a tree growing: if growth is to be encouraged, it is necessary at any time, too, the grower maintains the size careful not to encourage such branches relative to others and should ensure that, as soon as possible, as long as possible and as much as possible it produces the best possible results.

And such is indeed the concern of the government.

Such is indeed the task that we have pursued since we came back in the Ivory Coast, after a particularly rewarding visit to our Tunisian brothers and a stay in Europe and America that we has strengthened the bonds of friendship and cooperation bases that under are pleased to have with countries of these continents.

Thus, since that time - without abandoning their ordinary work or dispose of discretion guarantee of efficiency - the party and the government have focused in four main directions; Unless elsewhere to anticipate a development which we felt the sense that to open justice and progress.

Improving the condition of the workers, first, in this area, working closely with trade union bodies and the business community - which I could appreciate again the understanding, made with intelligence and attachment to our country - we have already achieved quite satisfactory results: they concern as well the increase in remunerations as strengthening job security, the benefit of the extended retirement for all workers there including domestic workers, elimination of wage distortions which remain between the different parts of the country, or the Ivorian nationals, progressive and at all levels, businesses operating in Ivory Coast.

A joint committee will soon establish new bases of the table of the minimum wage, given the country's current situation.

With all the leaders of the nation, with all the elements informed of the actual situation of our economy; with all those who know or guess the strict laws of cooperation and international competition, I affirm once again that, for the moment at least, we could not go beyond without drying up the source of our prosperity without compromising quickly the fate of our workers - and, through them, that of ... the entire nation - and without reducing to nothing the legitimate and high ambitions we have for our children.

I also note that in our mind, these benefits are only one step, and that, therefore, the most likely as our economy continues to grow, the government will ensure that the fruits of progress are shared equitably to Ivorians: it will continue to ensure that their work, their competence and dedication are getting better recompensed, that our youth can consider the commercial and industrial careers prospects emerged that workers found a welcoming business, fraternal, human, understandable and offering promotion opportunities justified, and that the right to work, security and a good old age become realities.

At the same time, it will seek to exert price control as the benefits granted to workers do not risk being compromised.

A quarter of the budget to youth

Secondly, training for ten years - that is to say from when the Ivory Coast was prepared quickly and completely fulfill his own destiny - our country has made great efforts for its youth. expensive effort, too, as they are every year nearly a quarter of our budget not only indispensable efforts and unanimously accepted, but also effective: almost half of our children are not enrolled now whereas before independence they were only 5%? Secondary and technical schools, are they not multiplied?

Our university did not she created, then gradually enlarged, welcoming a growing number of students and disciplines, seeking and finding, at the same time, many answers to specific problems that the acquisition of knowledge and "know do "raises in a country like ours?

But again, we must do more, go faster, and probably later anyway.

Can we be satisfied, in developing countries an educational device too isolated and too isolated from the body social and economic reality, while many industrialized nations to blame him, before giving it up?

Now, what is necessary, in Ivory Coast, it is a system that is designed according to our means certainly, but also according to our needs, and first to the needs of working life, that it is industrial, commercial, agricultural, administrative, educational or medical.

This assumes that our schools, large and small, and our university operate as industrial companies, I mean, of course, as industrial companies that would operate according to modern standards, that is to say, in particular, with a view produce more and better at lower cost, providing a quick and flexible that the application market; which, from cycles in which the acquisition of basic knowledge would be strengthened, distinguish them training tools, depending on the desired specialties and levels where they should be located; who renounce the concept - easy but impoverishing - "waste" to replace it with that of "by-products", including strengthening guidance cells and the proliferation of collection structures; who would organize constant relations between these devices and the nation to work on the one hand, and, within the system, between different disciplines on the other; which, through dialogue at all times, would transform the materials, programs, lessons and degrees in as much living realities desired by everyone they are interested in one way or another, that is, -dire by those who teach, for those who learn, for those who use and those, finally, which allow all this to exist.

expensive housing and inadequate

It is also, to the gradual creation of this school and the university that the government is committed; soon, the country may consider that in this matter it is possible to put in place structures that would be both more human and more efficient and create something essentially new and bold, that Ivory Coast waiting for the future of young fully meets their hopes and sacrifices of their elders.

There is another problem that concerns us at the highest point: it is housing in the cities, especially, one that affects employees with limited resources, operations, workers and clerks of trade, the industry and administration.

Again, since independence, efforts have been made and thousands of homes were built. But they are inadequate and too expensive for these small grants.

However, having tried or considered all solutions, we are forced to recognize that our resources are not commensurate with our needs. These are growing in the double thrust of urbanization - especially sensitive global phenomenon in Africa - and economic growth, which requires the presence in the main cities of labor-intensive, but too poorly qualified to access the property or even the enjoyment of decent housing.

Under these conditions and after exhausting the different remedies consistent with the maintenance of our liberties, I reached the conclusion that only a contribution to the financing of both direct, massive and immediate state could partially solve this problem and answer the expectations of our compatriots.

I also decided to make this intervention and to identify at the earliest the necessary budgetary means.

Maybe these will ile provided by the introduction of a special tax, the proceeds would be allocated to cost of money which would reduce even the cost of housing. This action of the state and express active solidarity of the different layers of the nation, giving the most favored of them the opportunity to help the workers of our cities.

In any case, this problem needs to find quickly a satisfactory solution and he will find;

A policy of peace and cooperation

Outside, the Ivory Coast will continue always through dialogue, through personal contacts, for tolerance, for non-interference by the absolute neutrality, a policy oriented towards peace, international cooperation and the progressive realization of brotherhood, understanding and of African unity.

Pons us for some months, a problem has taken over many others: because it is an African problem, because it affects people who are almost neighbors and who are our brothers, and because this problem Biafran we saw evolve in just one year, the interest to anxiety, and anxiety to anxiety.

Ivory Coast take a clear position in this regard, well-considered and democratically stopped. Certainly, noting the progressive awakening of much of international opinion, we can be pleased to see our attitude shared by a growing number of authorities of all kinds.

But we have no use of a satisfaction, which would fuel alas! the sufferings of our brothers and Biafran Nigerians.

No ! by making its voice heard, Ivory Coast has not cared to weigh the advantages and disadvantages of political position. She was willing to see the human side of this issue, which is also from the beginning and increasingly, an essentially human problem.

Do before any share or interest, direct or indirect, present or future, in this massacre to conflict paces, Ivory Coast continue to awaken the universal conscience to these events. The universal consciousness and first African consciousness, since these are our brothers and it is the dignity and freedom of Africa.

For if tomorrow our brothers in southern Africa were still oppressed, if their opposition to unjust and shameful regimes spread once again smothered in blood, if the industrialized nations indirectly contributed to maintaining this state of affairs, in what would derision turned our protests if today we remain unmoved by the countless dead, who testify - how can you still doubt? - the existence of a people and its willingness to be considered as such?

May God enlighten and help people of good will for peace, the peace that we call all our wishes will soon realize in this corner of Africa that is dear to all.

So four topics which I wanted to keep all and which, alone, would justify the meeting in a few months, the National Congress of the PDCI, today remains what it was yesterday, the irreplaceable melting pot where confront the opinions and which emerges the future of the nation.

Whether improving the conditions of workers and their housing, that is to say their increased participation in the results of the national expansion; whether the adaptation of our school and our university to the realities and needs of this country, that is to say profound renewal of often designed instruments at times, in countries for men and by men who are not ours; or whether, finally, our attitude towards the Biafran problem is to say, the statement still too isolated from a human truth, all this to the inside outside, demonstrates our commitment to build with all our friends an Ivory Coast, happier, more fraternal and Ivory Coast; all expressed our concern to hear a friendly voice that owes nothing to anyone except to those, Ivorian or not, which made our thick it is, for our happiness and pride, a land peace, a land of men.

