Ivorians Ivorians, my Dear compatriots!

On the threshold of the new year, let us first briefly and that the year 1968 now ending has been for the world in general and for Côte d'Ivoire, in particular, before we look at what we would like to see happen in our beloved country during 1969.

Strength is we recognize that, despite repeated calls for peace between people, between nations, negotiations, launched by many illustrious personalities including His Holiness Pope Paul VI, the indefatigable apostle of peace , 1968, so she brought some satisfaction to humanity, was a year of the most disturbing, strewn throughout disorders of all kinds of disputes, the questioning of the structures of human society, financial difficulties, money. And, even worse, it will worsen seen the most terrible scourges: WAR ...

Yes, our world, seeing it, sadly, we provide topics of increasing concern.

Here, however, a solution of peace finally sketch, which one would it take into account above all the want and interests of the people themselves.

But here, where three continents are built and where, over the ages, have developed so many things, a persistent condition, sometimes enlightened hopes and sometimes loaded heavier concerns, as men seem to hear or stifle the voice of reason, tolerance and justice.

Ailleurs encore, what lent prolifique et processus de détente and rapprochement here is soudainement suspendu by the brutal and dérisoire réaction de ceux qui, comme en tours in places and all time s'insurgent contre une évolution qu'ils n'ont of ni ni Orienter prévoir et imposent by force and in mépris plus élémentaire de la justice, de leur diet tracasseries policières contraires à la liberté et au bonheur de l'homme.

And all this - I mean the inability of some to settle questions other than by force and denial - all this finds its most dramatic expression not far from our Côte d'Ivoire: the more dramatic because most costly in lives and because spreading, recently, in the heart of the continent certainly has, even more than others, needs peace and that, even more than the others, is willing to dialogue and the fraternity due to its traditions and beliefs.

WORLD WAR AND VIOLENCE ...

it is indeed a world worrying about everything this year, it was contrary to the true man.

A world as worrying by all that has not and that could have been done. Because the world did not see this dramatic and scary; he at the same time, printing to prepare a future at least as dark.

That war swallow in one day the equivalent of the budget of many poor countries, as a way also there are few when it comes to terrify and destroy which is also calculated just when s' is to create, relieve, assist and elevate; we never talked much to help and that long since we never had so little helped; that interest, contempt hate to mobilize resources as formidable, while generosity and justice together so little: in wishing all decide today by force, it creates deficiencies and imbalances of tomorrow all this we also seems worrying that everything we live in today, which was taken or tolerated in long hand.

No, it is not easy these days to grow into a world inspired by too much violence; it is not easy to strengthen unity, when the antagonisms seek supporters among nations; it is not easy to achieve a sustainable balance and increasing prosperity, when still more united world - for better or for worse - is pleased with so much inequality and misery.

ROAD OF IVORY COAST

Yet we allow ourselves or win by discouragement or by skepticism. Today as yesterday, the road from the Ivory Coast is clearly traced. Today as yesterday, it will be difficult but hugely successful. Provided that we do everything to keep moving ahead, we will be well positioned to take maximum advantage of the change of mentality and behavior will happen, sooner or den, when men, all men, finally understand that admirable modern techniques can not be used for achieving targets exceeded.

Despite these sad events, which have spared no continent is it not indeed heartening that we could happily during the twelve months, do good work and progress in all fields; and this in a world of violence, however, lends itself less to actions for which only concerns us: HAPPINESS OF MEN.

The various workings of the state, now running smoothly functioned satisfactorily. Our governments have successfully continued their efforts to adapt to the complex tasks of our development and have benefited from the entry in the increased number of young national cadres. Never again, the Ivory Coast has so sold abroad, she never had much bought it; our different budgets never been so large, our ports as active, our energy and our transportation also solicited, our students, our trainees, our college and our students in such numbers; jobs never been so numerous.

And then - the development creating development, as called stagnation stagnation - never more our credit outside was as real and as concretely demonstrated. Never, therefore, such vast regions hitherto disadvantaged or neglected totally could not expect rapid changes, we expect the Koussou dam and the development of the Ivorian Southwest with the national priority realization of the port of San Pedro.

And, at the same time, the multiple actions undertaken to diversify our economy, produced effects more visible, whether in rice crops, cotton and palm, or those of the pineapple, rubber and coconut, and finally, the hopes placed in those of sugar cane, fruits, vegetables and some plants or fibers.

STABILITY AND TRUST UNIT

Yes, never Ivory Coast did also advanced forward on the path of progress; never, either, Ivorians and Ivoriennes, we could not, as legitimately, feel the impression to form a nation within a united country, since in this year, we won again in balance and unity in variety and depth, and this, in all areas and at all points of view.

So our efforts are worth our sacrifices today another increase. They justify our Ivory Coast is unanimously considered a truly developing country. And this, let us, derives from a root cause: the trilogy of the UNIT, the Stability and TRUST. Unity around our Party around its objectives and about its leaders. domestic stability, which we already gives much by itself, but, moreover, the essential foundation of trust. Confidence, yes, asset essential for development, as difficult to obtain as easy to lose confidence granted or refused by the only merit of individuals or communities.

We certainly have the right to be satisfied.

But we, too, need to be ambitious for our country.

It is to the most advanced countries to those with the pace of development is the fastest, to those who make the most of their wealth and to those who know best to prosperity in the service of MAN, we must turn our eyes to try to continue our progress.

For powerful or small, large or growing, these are the countries where that matter, by their means or their example.

PEACE HAPPINESS PROSPERITY

A new year will start in a few hours. What are we to expect of her?

There is, first, that we may wish: PEACE and prosperity, happiness and a word to all men of good will. We hope that God and men please hear us.

He then there we can promote outside. But there also and especially what we can do at home, which depends on us.

That 1969 way our country further progress in the economic and social order is a certainty: we have gathered for this timely, necessary means, we have made choices and decisions taken appropriate.

But it takes that next year, our progress is amplified by the increased enthusiasm that we bring everyone to our task; and must also enjoy these advances in a manner comparable to all those who, in Ivory Coast, contribute to overall prosperity.

Amplify our progress and make that property development is accompanied by the development of individuals, it depends on us, all of us.

Workers and their desire to provide products, goods and more satisfactory services for those who consume them, who will use them or solicit.

It depends on the officials, their will to overcome certain ambitions to act on the general interest, modesty inspire their situation and needs of the country, finally the consistency that will make them choose tirelessly indispensable compared the useful, the better compared to the well, the more durable and less expensive compared to the short-lived and expensive.

This depends on the business leaders and, in particular, how they will find, first by themselves and in themselves, the ability to create, to change or develop their "houses"; their real desire to do that in Ivory Coast, they are cells where everyone has the ability to understand and rise.

It also depends on leaders of this country and the way they outperform, they will demonstrate effectiveness, imagination and this challenging but essential quality that is the COURAGE INTELLECTUAL: the courage responsible worthy of the name needs to constantly assert the primacy of the nation and preserve the chances of the national community vis-à-vis all.

PROMOTING SOCIAL

On the other hand, it is in our power to focus, during the next year, on this or that point. And our intention is to promote social initiatives, so that Ivorians benefit more from economic prosperity, whether by spreading education and culture, the strengthening of the fixture and improving living conditions, housing and compensation made to employees.

Already in 1968, a special effort was made in the field of housing and twelve months have seen many build housing. But we know that these results are insufficient compared to the huge needs and we said, too, that the government should and concerned about this state of things, considered the solution of this problem as a national priority.

Since then, resources have been made inside and outside, and measures have been adopted, which will start to be implemented from the beginning of next year. Everyone soon find that the extraordinary means are assigned to the happy resolution of a problem as it extraordinary.

The State will do much, whatever is in his power. But in a country where the private company receives guarantees, satisfaction and encouragement that are rightfully his, it is desirable and necessary that it assumes, too, his part in this operation.

Some initiatives have already been taken in this direction: I wish they extend, they multiply and that governments lend their full assistance.

In 1968, the Coast Ivory workers - in full agreement with the party, with the government and with employers - have obtained several notable advantages. In all countries - in all free countries and liberals, at least - it is the rule that the general prosperity and progress in productivity go hand in hand with an improvement in wage conditions: what is true and good for other countries, which, in these not there, contributes, moreover, to increase prosperity and strengthen the overall balance must be true and good for the Ivory Coast.

It is clear, therefore, that the benefits of 1968 are not an end but a step in a process that everyone wants to promote; all, that is to say, governments, workers and employers, who, settling in Ivory Coast, accepted laws, constraints and opportunities of a modern economy.

Moreover, it should be equally clear that nobody here thinks compromising the competitiveness of existing or future companies. We reject as demagogic and mortal, everything would go to the trust: it was the key to our success at all; get along well, all it that way.

It is therefore that our legitimate desire to see workers and employers benefit equally and fairly, fruits that their joint action and economic conditions would allow them to collect.

COOPERATION AND FRATERNITY

It is in the same spirit, made of realism and frankness appropriate, now, to address the important and sensitive issue of the Africanization of the private sector, many discussions, studies and reflections have already helped to clarify the content.

It is in trust, and strengthen this trust, it is important to strongly consider this problem: each party knows, moreover, that any solution must be compatible with the requirements, increasingly severe competition international economic and that it must meet, at the same time, the root of a young nation aspirations.

Without doubt it is, now, very desirable that the heart and enlightens the above reason. Perhaps the wisdom to do it more designs without a certain amount of boldness?

We look forward to the year 1969 not only of the operations already underway, but those just decide or we are about to launch, for 1969 we will begin the Kossou confirm and perhaps our hoping to draw from our subsoil resources, which, until now, we have been lacking.

It is also during the next year as Southwest's development will enter a decisive phase and qu'apparaîtront the first major impact of this action, the most important certainly among those that we have undertaken for eight years. And then, my dear compatriots, there will be next year, we will encourage our best: cooperation with all those willing to lend them respecting our independence and what follows; strengthening our relationships with our friends, so constant and so precious; brotherhood with those African countries that still more fully meet our desire to establish with them naturally privileged relations; there will be, too, the collaboration of increasingly advanced that we are quite willing to develop with our neighbors speaking increasingly concrete results of our agreement, old and strong in its eight years of existence and activity; there will be the life of our Organization African and Malagasy Common, so dear to our hearts for what it is and for the wonderful hope that it draws in the cause of African Unity.

THE TRAGEDY OF BIAFRA

Finally there will be the tragedy of BIAFRA that upsets us and which we hardly as men, as free citizens and as Africans.

As men, because what is happening in Biafra is primarily an immense human tragedy, which has already swallowed up hundreds of thousands of human lives, lives of responsible men or fighters but also women's lives, old people and innocent children.

As citizens of a country that has learned and knows from experience what obstacles, what arguments, what slander is almost inevitably encounter a people willing to take responsibility for his fate.

As Africans, lamenting the sad advertising and made our continent, we regret that this problem away, more or less, the path of unity and finding alas! in apathy of many of the leaders and international opinion, in this nuanced indifference or contempt fun the whiff of racism and an ulterior colonialism.

On this painful subject, our country has made its position clear. Possessing, obviously, any present or future interest in this showdown unravel in favor of one or the other, we felt could and should make the voice of our country.

Because it is a matter in which no one can remain abroad, all African states have expressed their views on the Biafran problem.

Three of them and we have adopted an attitude of trying to help clear a humane solution acceptable to the parties involved.

Some have embraced a different approach from ours. And others still have not adopted any official position, which, contrary to what they can think and despite the undoubtedly respectable character of their mobile, unfortunately interpreted by many as an encouragement to seek by force a solution, which, however, can only result of dialogue and negotiation.

UNITY IN DIVERSITY

We respect all these positions and we refrain from the judge. We want the same frame of mind prevalent with regard to those who, from a fact obvious to all points of view regrettable, have made known their views and fired all compatible consequences with their desire to see our continent in peace and united, even in diversity, rather than letting cynically exploit their unfortunate divisions by those who want to extend their hegemony in the world.

To whom the weapons or the agreements they will decide? Is that what it is for us? ... Men suffer, we rescue them; children will die, that we welcome. Is it conceivable attitude to other men and for Africans?

Should we not we again exceed certain reflexes, some interest or some selfishness to fulfill our duty of solidarity towards our brothers tried, as these would do for us, if, unfortunately, we were in the same situation ?

Africa, in this case, goes astray, divides and seems to lose sight of the essential: we denounce, in Africa, in charge.

After so many deaths, ruins, nameless misery, life in a fraternal together is it still possible for Biafra?

Biafra wants to be independent; as he has the right?

It is not us who will answer these questions.

Eighteen months of fierce resistance, and hundreds of thousands of corpses enough for this. When a human reaches this size, it is only men and that we vibrate, we're talking about and that, wherever possible, we act sounds.

As men and as a state, we have amply demonstrated our commitment to the law and that we were able to sacrifice, if necessary. Nevertheless, we can not accept to be slaves of the law, when it is abusively wielded to smother in blood the voice of freedom and of justice. Everyone is free to hold the highest values ​​of its choice: we made the only choice consistent, in our way, with our consciousness of men. Ivorians and Ivorian! Being happy in the 20th century, playing a real-modest role in the concert of nations, this requires a number of conditions, including economic and social, are met.

ON THE RIGHT TRACK

Between us, we have always used the warm language of frankness and truth. As well, tonight, I can tell you that all these conditions are met during the next year.

Whatever the reasons - and they are many and complex - the delay, which we suffer has accumulated for centuries; we can hope to fill in a few years. That each and accepts it with courage.

But what we also know, you and me, it is that time will allow us to repeat what time has done; is that our efforts with our friends and modern techniques we can facilitate the work and speed up the course of events; is that in a generation, we have not only advanced but traveled a distance that others sometimes began several centuries to overcome. Is that if the road is long, we are on track, all united, animated by the same faith, the same hope looking towards the same goal. And that purpose is, there, within reach.

So, as in the past faster and more united than in the past continue, go forward. And with God's help and through our efforts, 1969 will be another Ivorian year, a year of peace, a year of progress, a year of brotherhood. "

