President Philippe Yacé opened Saturday morning the first regular session 1969 of the National Assemblies and in accordance with Article 31 of the constitution. Several personalities so the Ivorian President Mamadou Coulibaly of the Economic and Social Council and Alphonse Boni of the Supreme Court, members of government and members of the diplomatic corps; attended the Formal opening.

On this occasion, President Philippe Yacé to delivered the opening address that here.

"When I have the honor to formally open the first Ordinary Session of 1969, I would like to address with you the life of our institutions. It is true that collective psychology familiar door has seen in the past the best time of institutions and companies, and it is not uncommon to hear express concerns about an alleged decline of democracy which is fixed the 'golden age at the beginning of the century, which one reckons the perils that the watches at the same time we measure the chances of life with a sad objectivity actuary ... in truth the more summary judgments are made on the functioning of political institutions Saharan since the countries in this region have achieved national and international sovereignty. These judgments often relate the chances of democracy and let all drill skepticism. Remember my dear colleagues of our initial idea the leaders of the Democratic Party of Côte d'Ivoire headed by President Houphouet-Boigny understood that each nation has a particular view of democracy and harmed people can claim the discovery in this area of ​​universal panacea; especially since democracy set this conduct governance which must adapt to the circumstances relating to the place, time and people. It would be easy to refer to the Constitution; but it is not sufficient because experience shows that the customary application can lead very far written text. Moreover in Africa as elsewhere texts are not enough to account for the actual political life. This can be highlighted in each country by studying the forces that exert it I mean that the interest of a constitution is to translate mainly designs and reveal the dominant concern among politicians who took the burden of a country.

ATTENTION OF INITIATION

It is worth recalling that the constitutions of the countries of Black Africa reveal several points of imitation concern; there is there a general and natural fact which is certainly not peculiar to Africa: the examples provided by the political history of European countries and America who took the head of the constitutional movement, determined a typology become classic and new constitution is more or less inspired by one of these models. But it is also a remarkable fact that African constituents, particularly the Ivorian components did not operate a simple transposition; our loans were not mechanical, but reasoned and deliberate. Do we not had a glimpse of the development of law, marked largegement probably by the doctrines and experience of traditional constitutionalism, but essentially addresses some perceived needs with us?

Already the efficiency of power appears as a fundamental requirement for the survival of great nations. It results first of the inexorable competition that exores between these Nations itself; it also results from the nature of many different problems in power in my current. The complexity of the choices requires both careful preparation, great speed decisions and finally a continuous and sustainable performance.

The division of labor in which the only political action could escape now require the technicality far up in the exercise of power and requires that responsibilities are concentrated. This is why we have argued that we were a new state, a state that does not yet correspond to an already integrated nation, which did not reflect a willingness to existing unit in the minds; we could not resist the forces of local or ethnic, regionalism at the tribalism.

ONLY RULES PRESIDENTIAL

Moreover the transformation of the economic conditions necessary to still underdeveloped countries like Ivory Coast, was conditional discipline of production activities which involved itself firm action and continuo led by an insured duration power.

Who will deny that the tasks of the State have become more numerous? Technological progress has made them more complex, the conflict of interests worsened.

In these circumstances what could be the political regime of the young Ivory Coast, if not a presidential regime ', soul regime knew departure recognizes very broad powers to the executive that allow it in this phase of the development of play the role it? The presidential system requires, I admit, a permanent dialogue between the government and the public. Behold, my dear colleagues, emerges the need of your presence and your role is to legislate. Dana a world where complex problems forced an increasing existence of the role of the administration, you build this human element, vibrant political reality of the nation.

Your responsibilities? Indicate immediately that it was the Government bears the conduct of business; it is the government guarantees the continuity of the state quia responsible for carrying out political action.

CONNECTION BETWEEN MASS AND THE GOVERNMENT

As for you my dear colleagues, if the Parliamentarian's primary mission is to make the Act and to exercise democratic control over the activities of the Government, he equally intended to ensure permanent liaison between the popular masses that is authorized and responsible government to implement national policy. Your role will be in the context of national development to participate in the "setting condition" of the masses to economic and social development program.

It is indeed that political action is exercised directly and permanently in primary communities that it is necessary to initiate the democratic management, to prepare for the responsibilities town or city: it will be by therefore an education and information role. We parliamentarians are thus responsible for maintaining a double flow of information between the people we are proxies and powers which we participate. This double current results from the rest when it is exercised in full, the vitality of a democracy; Nature often dispel ambiguities, it facilitates the adhesion of the masses to government action which they are able to better assess the merits.

The existence in Ivory Coast a Party certainly allows effectively fill the Parliamentary such functions which are of particular importance in connection with the definition and implementation of a national development policy. Thus our action, didnt forget, is in the context of current concerns are to encourage by all means initiatives and popular assent to the party agenda.

SHUT THE DEMOCRACY

I recall that the drafting and voting of the last Plan Act make it even more necessary direct intervention of political leaders we are. Indeed our role was decisive in defining the objectives of the Plan; choices that were operas depend on the economic, social and human Nation. The development of the economy, full employment, the development and diversification of national resources, the processing of local products are some of the points of impact.

You will measure and the original character of the action of the Ivorian parliamentarian in a changing country like Côte d'Ivoire, can not be equated to that exercised by the elected representatives of the old industrial democracies. Nui doubt that this framework is the real ferment of democracy because if democracy pout be defined by the desire to achieve a free and equal society beings, it is characterized at least initially as a political system where business are managed by all the individual wishes.

I have the pleasure to develop these ideas to you on the eve of the end of the legislature; the subject is too vast and rich that I can claim to have exhausted. I only wanted, in this world where everything is disorder, you say my conviction of eminently democratic Ivory Coast. I would stress that the chance may be the greatest of our country is that power is exercised by men of experience. These men, and President Houphouet remains the most illustrious, learned concretely and in its smallest details how a democracy works. The elite of our youth also learned on the benches of different universities Yace The President's speech was followed by a suspension during which the guests were invited to a wine of honor. Meets again, MEPs renewed 81 per vote silk unanimously parliamentarians, the former office of the National Assembly.

Never me first known as special glow so our country. Indeed a big rally followed by an important scrolled marked yesterday morning to B h. the working party of the Cultural Center of Treichville. Seven hours, the workers themselves are like many, from Treichville, Adjame, Plateau, Cocody and Port-Bouet. AB 30 pm, to the cheers of a huge crowd, the Minister of Labor and Social Affairs, Mr. Koné Lancina, accompanied by his chief of staff, Mr. Zanon Kone, joy entered which is greeted by a delegation of the Executive Committee of the UGTCI. The meeting which, let us remember the many involved is started around 9 am. After At. Pierre guy, a member of the UGTCI committee that u have e meeting in the crowd the members of the Executive Committee member of the union office of teaching and president of its successor to locate the important character of the demonstrations. He also thanked the Minister of Labor and all the workers present at the meeting. Then the secretary general of the UGTCI, Joseph Coffin spoke to the history of May 1 and draw the name of the General Union of Workers of Côte d'Ivoire, but his fraternal at all world workers

"It is a position of praying for the reduction of the working day to B h. in conditions sometimes courageous to heroism that our pioneers of unionism managed to snatch coat day he continued. This is an unprecedented act in the history of the labor movement.

ORIGIN OF EIGHT HOURS

Can we talk validly May 1 without British monarch Alfred, the most illustrious of the Saxon kings of England who first had the "three eight". This precursor of the eight-hour day reign of 871 to 988. It was 898 at the time felt very strong that he made a vow to share the 24 hours of the day into three eight hours would be devoted to exercises of piety , eight hours managed to sleep, study and recreation and eight hours in public affairs.

This was accomplished, but unfortunately the use of watches pos existing at that time in England, the monarch was using burning torches each eight hours to measure time. "

The secretary general of the UGTCI then recalled the many May which were tragic. Then, starting from May 1, which should symbolize the workers' action, he emphasized that May 1 is also marked by the sounds of the working class with full awareness of its right and its role li said further that has to see in developing countries, where one must concentrate all efforts on economic and social progress and the transformation of inherited structures, trade union unity is a paramount necessity. This is why the UGTCI considers that this unity must be consolidated every day for the biggest Ivorian unionism.

The General Union of Workers of Côte d'Ivoire, concerned for the future of countries known proclaims the fact that forum coat unity, peace and stability are the best factors to ensure economic and social advancement of a nation ".

COOPERATION BETWEEN THE PARTY AND UGTCI

Joseph Collie should conclude with this message:

crankcase day are, work, renewing its unwavering in Chief, knew Party and government knew. In form the most sincere wishes for the rapid development of Côte d'Ivoire, I also hope that the fruitful cooperation already established between our plant and the Party continues to develop.

Long live May 1 rally day of fighting unity of the working class around the world! Long live the UGTCI! Long live the Ivory Coast! "

AN IMPORTANT DEFILE

Six different resolutions read by Soumahoro, member of the executive of the union, were approved unanimously and by acclamation as per the workers present.

A major parade composed of workers and animated by the "jet" fanfare Joseph Pango was to pass through the Plateau and Treichville to join the war memorial where a wreath was déponde. But before the workers went to the President of the Republic, where they were received by President Auguste Denise, Minister of State, ensure the Acting Head of State, President Houphouet-Boigny. M Joseph Coffin, on behalf of workers, filed for the Presidency of the Republic six resolutions containing the claims that we publish in our.

ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A NATIONAL LEGISLATION ON THE RATE OF RENTS TO RESIDENTIAL USE

Abidjan workers and met on May 1, 1969, Cultural Center of Treichville under the aegis of the U.G.T.C.I Committee, on the occasion of Labor Day.

After objectively examined the problem rents for residential use is Ivory Coast, including in Abidjan; CONSIDERING that housing is one of the older workers' needs; WHEREAS residential construction companies fail to the growing needs of urban workers; WHEREAS the shortage of homes for residential use, the owners exploiting the situation and a subsequent cost of rent prices; CONSIDERING that half of the solar workers are used to pay rent; CONSIDERING that it becomes increasingly difficult to solar the worker to be accommodated in the urban city of Abidjan; CONSIDERING that the efforts of construction companies of the site remain insufficient and do not allow as well for many tenants to own the sales system; DEPLORE this situation;

URGE:

the establishment of national legislation regulating use Dwelling rent rates; the allocation of land to workers who drill the request and granting of foreman has long terms for the construction of their homes; "Fulfillment of the conditions for granting loans to purchase houses for residential use"

ON THE ADJUSTMENT OF SALARIES IN THE PUBLIC SERVICE

Abidjan workers and on 1 May 1969 at the Cultural Center of Treichville, under the aegis of the Executive Committee U.G.T.C.I, the anointing of Labor Day.

After a briefing on the issue of revaluation of salaries in the civil service; CONSIDERING that the revaluation of salaries in the Ivorian civil service remained raised since 1988, when dropping the territorial civil service in the metropolitan Public Service; CONSIDERING that the 1989 Civil Service (99-138 lei 3 September 1999) has this pos treatments revaluation problem; CONSIDERING that since the independence of the Ivory Coast salaries in the civil service is blocked in the framework of a national policy; WHEREAS the salary scale in force in the civil service does not match the cost of living; WHEREAS officials and state officials is still actively involved in nation building; WAIT with great impatience the promise made, one in July 1988, government agents of Public Service Ivorian seeking to examine their situation; RENEW their full confidence and unwavering commitment to the Head of State, His Excellency President Felix Houphouet-Boigny, the government and the party, for the prosecution in the interest of all of the economic development policy and social Coast Ivory;

URGE: the revaluation of salaries of civil servants and state officials. "

ON INCREASE IN - CONTROLLERS LABOR; - OF ATTACHMENT OF LABOR AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS; AND LABOR INSPECTORS; AND SOCIAL LAWS

"Workers and Abidjan meeting on 1 May 1969 in Treichville Cultural Center under the aegis of the Executive Committee of the U.G.T.C.I, on the occasion of Labor Day.

After hearing the detailed presentation on the status of labor services and the operation of these services in Ivory Coast; CONSIDERING the growing number of commercial, industrial and agricultural in Ivory Coast; CONSIDERING that the insufficient number of labor inspectors, labor attachés and Social Affairs and labor inspectors and Social Laws do not allow those who currently exercise to fulfill their role; CONSIDERING that the economic and social development of the Ivory Coast makes the increase in personal labor services; CONSIDERING that these agents are primarily to ensure the application of evidence is edited labor and worker protection. CONSIDERING that the shortage of officers is often the cane is compliance with the law in some companies; CONSIDERING the absolute necessity of regular testing of all agricultural businesses and construction sites;

URGE:

the establishment of a labor inspection level capital of each prefectural department; the rapid increase in the number of labor inspectors, labor attachés and Social Affairs and labor inspectors and The Social; the recruitment of people with long year of work experience in controllers and as labor attachés and Social Affairs and accelerated training; that special benefits are granted to personal labor services and social affairs'

ON THE PAYMENT OF EXPENSES OF FAMILY AGENTS ALLOWED TO PROFESSIONAL PENSION

"Workers Abidjan suburb, meeting on 1 May 1989, the Cultural Center of Treichville, under the aegis of the Executive Committee U.G.T.C.I, on the occasion of Labor Day.:

After having heard a presentation on the payment of family allowances to retired staff; CONSIDERING that more officials are set to proportional retirement for health reasons; CONSIDERING that the pension awarded to civil servants is lower than normal retirees perceive; CONSIDERING that good parenting is vital to the development of the country; CONSIDERING that retirees enjoying a proportional pension does not receive child benefit;

ASK:

maintaining family allowances to all fractional enjoying a proportional pension '

ON THE PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION OF RETIREMENT TO OFFICIALS

"Workers and Abidjan suburb, meeting on 1 May 1989, the Cultural Center of Treichville, led the U.G.T.C.I of the Executive Committee,` the occasion of Labor Day.:

After hearing the detailed presentation on the payment officials of a retirement allowance; CONSIDERING that the system of civil pensions for officials of the administration of the Ivory Coast has provided in some of the provisions of severance pay to retraies; CONSIDERING that this award is for the employee a special allowance to alleviate their heavy loads of facilities; WHEREAS having thousand share shelter;

ASK:

derogation from the provisions of the lei on the rules of civil pensions of officials; the payment officials allowed to retire with severance pay in retirement. "

ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF AN ACT OF OWNERSHIP ALLOCATION AT HOME WORKER

"Workers and Abidjan suburb, meeting on 1 May 1969 at Treichville cultural center under the auspices of the U.G.T.C.I the Executive Committee, on the occasion of Labor Day.:

After hearing the detailed presentation on the establishment of a lei on the allocation of possession at home worker; CONSIDERING that, on the occasion of a study on raising the family allowance rates in the private sector, the problem of a redevelopment of its allocations arose and it seemed appropriate to rethink orientation; CONSIDERING that from time to coat a lei project on the establishment of an allowance possession worker's home has been tabled before the National Assembly regulations; CONSIDERING that are all still not worm the day; CONSIDERING that the purpose of this allocation is to achieve a national cap imméritoire pieces in the hands of families and sew it particularly agonize housing problem, essential tool of good maintenance and a good education for children;

URGE:

Lei that the draft back for discussion before the National Assembly "

