"Ivorians Ivorians, my dear compatriots,

On the occasion of the celebration of the ninth anniversary of the accession of our beloved country's independence, I would take stock of our main problems, both in the domestic sphere and in that of our foreign policy, stressing a number of issues that recent events have highlighted.

I am specifically happy to make this statement today because it allows me to find this city as beautiful as living, an area that reminds me so many memories and the people who have always demonstrated their commitment to the cause of national unity as well as a surprising economic dynamism.

I would like to take our National Day to tell you all our satisfactions and our hopes but also fears that the international situation continues to be born. If, indeed, developments which bring us some comfort, it seems to me that in this middle of 1969, some shadows still come to us from outside that forbid me to hide the concerns remain ours.

The world, it must be observed, without joy, we do not offer in August so many reasons to hope for the brotherhood of man, in tolerance, in justice and in freedom.

If the Far East, there are signs of relaxation specify if, on both sides, now it seems that it takes to reach a solution that will finally give peace to this part of Asia, we must wait, I fear, for months even, before the cease fighting. On other continents, as clouds again, that threats of unrest and also dramas and how we would like to say today that this land has finally found peace and that men, beyond their concerns, their interests and their differences out su achieve a better understanding and harmony.

PEACE BIAFRA

But closer to home are continuing on the ground in Africa, bloodshed, especially heartbreaking, especially atrocious they oppose our African brothers and their painful consequences reach too often innocent people, women, the elderly, children, who only wanted to live in peace.

How not to emphasize, once again, how certain silences we appear inexplicable reveals how unjust is the disinterestedness of some world leaders in the presence of a drama also upsetting that we reached the depths of ourselves.

If there is a few months, despite all the attention seemed to be fixed opportunely on the fate of some technicians, the fact remains that millions of people are waiting for this interest wants to do well on them so this tragic conflict finally stops, and that such a solution just and humane as possible can be made very quickly. What better testimony to wait for international solidarity and equity desires and harmony, so often expressed by some and by others, that the concrete consultation, lasting and disinterested of all, to put an end to this terrible war.

And yet the world can sometimes find some reason to be proud and have confidence in the imagination and creative intelligence of man. This recent weeks are out allowed us to participate in one of the highlights and most moving of human history. What an amazing miracle of intelligence, technology and boldness that first landing on another planet!

Faced with an astonishing acceleration of scientific progress, however we can only dream of in the service of simple human needs, such gigantic means.

Why is it, in fact, still, that just as the efforts and research scholars allow such feats, men remain hungry, that innocent people die every day by the thousands, that the chances of birth and life condemn thousands of beings to live so unhappily, throughout their existence?

Welcome therefore, as appropriate and as he deserves, this feat of science and modern technology, but regret did not yet know this other miracle, one that, ultimately, we shall take the heart, the miracle simple daily happiness for all men on earth.

Without being prisoners of the past and being aware of the needs and requirements of the irreversible march of world progress towards a daily more accelerated and decisive, let us first, and also before any thing, to craft a peaceful society , Sold Out and human progress.

INTERNATIONAL SOLIDARITY

Other events have allowed us, however, in recent months suggests that the international solidarity of Nations could gradually lead to an increased awareness of the most pressing problems of poor countries, and sar the development and implementation of decisions likely to give cooperation a concrete content and more suitable.

This is the first renewal of the Yaoundé Convention between member countries of the European Economic Community and those of Africa and Madagascar.

While it would be easy to regret the hard bargaining which they led or linger in the large gap that remains our needs and also the facilities and assistance that decode dice conventions. We must, however, exceed the reactions of this nature. Lex long discussions and difficult, are they often could not, in fact, lot of independent partners and frank, and above all, is it not essential that we Europeans friends and our African brothers have managed to maintain their association, in despite the temptations and stresses to which they were subject, the one and the other?

I must also express my satisfaction with the increased effort of the World Bank in favor of our country, recently highlighted efforts by signing an agreement worth our projects in the area of ​​oilseeds.

It is also very heartening to see this international institution to move as timely to help with product support organizations, particularly agricultural.

The main problem is it does not, in fact, to try to minimize the catastrophic consequences of the deteriorating terms of trade between rich and poorer countries?

It is a valuable asset as comforting as seeing the idea of ​​international cooperation, essential mark of our century affirm gradually, first, within these Nations, whose historic vocation is to light the way world and bring to others what they have better. That the most illustrious champions of this generous cause can get away without his work being compromised, yes certainly, it does not diminish our sadness yet adds to our confidence as to their merits.

I would now like to review these, in terms of the agricultural situation as in terms of projects and dan actions of the Government and particularly its achievements in the economic field.

If some of the shadows that I mentioned at the beginning of this message could prompt us to skepticism and a certain discouragement, there are other satisfactions that I want to tell you today and encourage confidence and optimism, optimism that should not make us forget how much is still long and difficult the road that will lead to economic growth and social development.

This first half of 1969 was first confirmed in us the confidence that we could have in the soundness of our institutions. The last few weeks may have been born, indeed, and I will have the opportunity to come back longer, some misunderstandings within our young University. These misunderstandings can not be treated, it will ground to a general crisis of our youth, let alone a serious conflict between certain generations.

COUNTRY DIALOGUE

Ivory Coast, it is primarily the country of dialogue and brotherhood and our young state has demonstrated, on this occasion, he was able, without resorting neither repression nor violence, restore calm in the mind.

In recent and very fruitful talks in Yamoussoukro, we knew, with representatives of the student world, demonstrate that this misunderstanding had, at no time challenged worryingly, not only trust in the regime's' gave the Ivory Coast, but the relations between the Party and the students.

This year 1969 has seen further, the Government, conscious ever closer Administration administered, multiply the number of departments that have gone from six to twenty-four.

Ivorians and Ivorian, and I think first of those more or less distant from major centers, will be able to gradually increase awareness of the goals and projects of the Government and benefit, with a more decentralized administrative infrastructure, closest servants, more likely to listen and to understand them and help them.

As for the problems of national education and specifically to those raised in our country, the young University of Abidjan, they remain one of the key concerns of the Party and Government.

The Government and the Party are attached forever, you know to give education and training, in all forms and at all levels, a place special. It appeared to them, in effect, very quickly, as evidence, a policy that would attach only to material and financial investments, without seeking a parallel increase in enrollment and training of qualified Ivorian executives would only lead to a generator development ultimately profound imbalances, since deprived of one of its most essential foundation, i mean the investment of men.

What to think, in fact, a country, especially a country like ours, which gives his children and friends as grounds for hope, yes, but think, in fact, a country that would show not able gradually to take charge of its own elites the various workings and the different structures of the organization and its growth?

Two, achievements seem, in this respect, particularly significant.

CONTINUING EDUCATION AND POPULAR ...

This is the first project of educational television is probably even meet the legitimate priority needs of generalization of education in our country. This project, which already receives from our friends the most effective support, aims continuing education and popular of all the inhabitants of this land.

For continuing education, I mean education whose continuity and escalation to ensure those who receive enrichment always larger and more numerous promotional opportunities.

For public education, I hear also, not only teaching children and adolescents but the equally important in terms of the development of the human person and in production, adults of all adults this country.

It is then the University Hospital, the Center, which will open in the coming months should allow the teaching of medicine to take off again in improved training conditions for our future managers of Health. There must also be a particularly effective search tool for a better definition of our goals and our methods in hospitals, and while increasing the capacity of hospitals in the capital, be ultimately an opportunity to improving the conditions of intervention of our future doctors in centers of more distant bush.

But I would like, on this achievement, since both it a few weeks ago, some problems have been born, you say, or more generally, of our University in the coming years.

I expect first a special training opportunity at the highest level, frameworks for our development, I mean not only executives and diplomas.

If it is important, indeed, whatever ultimately the knowledge finding patterns, a degree at times punishes the possession of a certain knowledge, it seems to me equally essential that these degrees can also cover a human, that they might not be always an intellectual and technical content of classical style, know to give our young graduates the skills able to make in their future employment, as operational as possible, the knowledge they have acquired. It is also desirable that this training makes them acquire a behavior, a way of being, to morally and character, which comply with the requirements of the responsibilities that will be naturally assigned.

REAL FRAMES

That our future graduates, and I specifically address to the young people around me today, are therefore not only of intelligence and well-filled heads, but also frames with all that implies dynamism, of initiative and enterprise serviceability, the command of others and oneself.

They also know how to open a permanent dialogue, understanding and tolerance. It would serve no purpose to be satisfied with comforting statistics curves, if the diplomas spread as synonymous with knowledge may accumulate and be the fittest personalities to shine and to assert their rights as prepared in effort to efficiency and awareness of their duties.

I told management, I also say executives for our development. What we serve ultimately diplomas to inadequate coping skills, who do not know or could not or would not want, first and foremost, serve the noble sense of the term, the imperatives social, economic and cultural rights of the Ivorian Nation?

That the University of Abidjan and its leaders know that we expect them to develop and implement the objectives, programs and the most appropriate training methods known to relevant countries accountable, effective, responsive and available: Ivory Coast has great need them to accelerate its economic development, ensure its indispensable social progress and assert his personality.

Teachers whose dedication I wish lei to pay special tribute, try this difficult patients and ongoing reflection on the adaptation of the training tool to our realities and our national perspectives; they continue and intensify their homes with makers use sectors, public or private; that the objectives and means of our development plans and our highest priority needs; Finally they know or keep open a dialogue are wide and confident as possible with their students about the purposes and methods of snow and research.

But I said the word "research" and that's another great mission that I would like, beyond the training of men see naturally assumed by our young University.

Train appropriate frameworks, happily inserted into the process of our development, but it is clear how mean single Vocational training, upper and quality. Do not train anyone for anything, certainly, but not to train only agents who have to answer for than a year old without short-term capacity for renewal and enrichment for themselves and for the community that receives them.

We need this research, whether basic or applied, it occurs in the scientific, technical, medical, economic, social or even educational, lead so as multidisciplinary and as diverse and open as possible the establishment of instruments of progress for the long term guarantee of our commitment to better predict and prepare for the future.

TO STUDENTS…

And now to you students, I address.

The academic world through the last few years, and in almost all countries, a crisis witnesses the most attentive and most lucid endeavor to demonstrate the profound gravity of: political protest, "crisis of civilization" confusion of the younger generations, many interpretations have been given. Place anyway University in the life of every state is too important to not ask us about it.

Ivorian students, allow me to express to you again and lei solemnly desire of the Government and my personal concern to give you, in the life of the state, even greater place you return as future leaders our economic, social, administrative, political and cultural. But know also that the requirements of our development and the sacrifices of the nation to ensure your training, imply that it is first and foremost your seriousness, your work and ros thinking skills we expect at sole benefit of the public interest, the best crops. The special place that is yours guarantees the provisions of your elders to listen to you, in the respect of our most noble traditions, but they will do so, of course, that within the framework of constructive proposals, obeying our own interests national and outside sout mess and all.

Fitted with usable knowledge and not just utility, be aware that a degree is not an end but a means soil are a step in your future development and provided the opportunity for personal promotion, always a source brighter radiation to the community.

future leaders, but primarily responsible for yourselves, so that leaks in the University, reflecting the lifeblood of the country, as is his pride and opportunity for the Party and the Government of an act of faith Permanent in its truest wealth, his youth.

ECONOMY AND ITS PROBLEMS

But our country is also its economy and development issues; I want to emphasize today in But, how recent months have been positive and comforting.

Most of our productions have seen a sharp increase: the oil palm and coconut in particular, recorded a very special extension that embodies our determination to pursue a bold policy of diversification, keystone of our agricultural development.

Our exports as our imports have increased dramatically and our trade balance showed a net surplus more than in previous years.

Steady growth of our industrial facilities, and better our transportation infrastructure, road, rail, port also with San Pedro and air with the commissioning of the new terminal of Abidjan; as many additional reasons for satisfaction and confidence.

All this has brought us in 1968, a very significant increase in gross national product and a significant increase in individual income Ivorians, albeit with differences that we know and we will work to reduce progressively.

This new leap forward of our young economy was, moreover, the opportunity to create thousands of new jobs. It was facilitated by the high quality of preliminary studies, the dynamism of local and foreign technicians and managers with the help we received from the outside; but it has been made possible by domestic stability and the brave civic and especially all employees and planters which it pleases me to make a public tribute. On this anniversary of our independence, I just wanted to point out.

This assessment of our economy, our finances, our trade is comforting reminder of the present and recent past; but this success is to first know the future and consider how, in time, sometimes difficult choices that the harmonious and progressive required.

SAN-PETER

Koussou, San Pedro, it's these two projects underway today, I want to talk to you longer, since it is thanks to them that will write an important page in our history.

The decision to build a deepwater port in San Pedro, including answers, you know, the concern of the Government to open the benefit of hitherto disadvantaged regions and sparsely populated Southwest, a market that will support their development and gradually win the overall pace of national development. This new modern port also allow some Ivorian production being exported to more profitably and address and in the best international competition increasingly fierce.

Certainly San Pedro is a port that should receive the heaviest ships sailing the west coast of Africa and a rapidly absorb heavy traffic.

But it is also a future city, new roads penetrating to the east and north, and a set of additional operations that allow the exploitation and disposal of wood, creating huge modern plantations Interestingly different products and facilitate their evacuation as well as the mineral wealth of the region, provided that research their promises.

San Pedro, it is our hope, giving life to a region, provide new jobs in large numbers and also lands to all who have the desire to develop them, create ultimately a development center which will contribute to the balance of our economy.

It's doing a reasonable bet, the enthusiasm, faith in the future and our willingness to reach give our country an infrastructure commensurate with its needs.

Koss

As for Koussou is the expected time of profound change for the economy of the country; jobs that just started, reach, for their part, two immediate objectives: the considerable increase in the production of energy essential for our industries, our cities and our countryside and the development of the Central Region. The artificial lake created by the dam, will be twice as large as Lake Geneva and enable the development of fishing and tourism.

The dam will make it possible, moreover, irrigation and cultivation of tens of thousands of hectares on which most modern methods will be implemented.

These major projects involve not only financial constraints to the implementation of various equipment but also assume that be made the most accurate solutions and the most delicate human problems posed by the relocation of a large population, which will be called, during the impoundment of the dam, leaving its traditional habitat areas and cultures.

This is not, in Ivory Coast, the country of the human, that we underestimate the difficulties of such movements and the Government will make a point of supporting the transfer and resettlement of populations.

A solemn commitment has already been made for on-site around the lake and on the perimeter to irrigate, or even on the Southwest virgin land, or finally, in some centers, the home and resettlement operation is an opportunity for economic and social progress that benefits both interested than the national community.

Koussou represents for our country a critical stage in its development, another bet that we will hold together, and that we will, I am convinced.

This is to demonstrate that a development project can not only profoundly alter certain technical data and economic but be, for men of this country, a source of social development and human formation.

Koussou, now a village, a dam tomorrow, tomorrow a new area, but also, thanks to you, thanks to your innovative willingness and ability to adapt to the requirements of this century, the sign for the country entirely to an irreversible commitment to the way of the modern world.

UNION - PROGRESS - JUSTICE

My fellow Americans, it is not easy to be men in the late twentieth century.

This century unclear dispense good and bad things, he knows too much to give us the same time as the biggest reasons for hope, the strongest reasons to fear and anxiety.

However, we have to live it. It is our responsibility, in particularly difficult conditions which are those of our country, to assume all the constraints, all the contradictions of a world that knows how to be, all at once, so disturbing and so exciting.

The road is long, I said, should lead us to a sustainable point of balance and prosperity.

Events will perhaps in the coming months, feed our fears.

We will, in any case, we defend certain temptations too great facilities.

But what we do not ignore you and me is that big steps already have been taken, that the habits that were not always good gradually abandoned and our, national unity than what can have sterile tribalism, conflicts of interests and selfishness, is consolidating year after year.

So let us continue in our path, for the greatest good of all, to better fit in a restless and troubled world, our place, modest, dignified and exemplary, and to contribute to progress in this Africa dear to our hearts. May we celebrate, in August, found in African peacekeeping, the tenth anniversary of our independence.

Ivorians Ivorians that the coming months are for all of us, even more than in the past, deep union of months, progress, justice and fraternity. "

