"The fear of the OAU, divided by our proposal for peace in Africa by neutrality and absolute neutrality, political neutrality, which forms a whole and that apartheid, so revolting that it is for our esteem clean, our African dignity, is only a relatively minor aspect, is unfounded.

If it is true in many African leaders of good faith who have not bothered to appreciate in all its aspects, it is hardly in those who deliberately chose China Camp Beijing affected the quick by a clear proposal unequivocally peace proposal by neutrality in a world divided by the violence and hatred and subjected increasingly to a war of a new type of permanent war , almost unlimited, because of the relentless onslaught of communism against economic liberalism regime that will not die.

As long as communism will occur in all wars, even those that initially did assume no ideological character, our young African countries can not avoid the terrible tragedy that knows Asia in a true neutrality policy.

Only the political divide in which some African leaders may, if we let them, to train our continent is a serious threat of division between African because we are some decided to refuse such a policy certainly the most dangerous to the survival of our continent as an independent continent.

This is not apartheid as such could divide Africans. Racial inequality which Negroes are victims, more acute course in South Africa, but also in many other countries, has never, to my knowledge, divided the world or threatened peace.

But if, for lightness guilty, blind fanaticism, it is pulled through a war against South Africa because of apartheid is practiced there, we offer here a new opportunity to communism always on the lookout to intervene with the sad consequences that we know.

Only the sake of the survival of our continent determines our crusade against the war in Africa, whatever the reason. I hate pride as much as hatred. But a huge ambition within me, simple but great ambition, ambition I share with all my heart with all African and particularly young African young professionals in Africa, hope and certainty of Africa serve all our soul the peace and Africa.

The thought never crossed my mind to be my peace, to make use of Africa as insinuate those inhabited by the demon of hatred and treachery.

In every African worthy of the name, only to sing:

Love Peace Love the human love of Africa! "

