"Ivorians Ivorians, My dear compatriots.

Here we are again, meeting, like every year, on the same date to celebrate with enthusiasm and joy, the anniversary of our national independence.

There are eleven, Ivory Coast became a free and sovereign state. Who looks at the years that have gone by and compares the paths before our independence and 1960. It is clear that our forward march was remarkably positive and we can be proud of the efforts undertaken and the results achieved.

A DYNAMIC Prefecture

Our joy is all the greater today than we were received by the proud and beautiful capital of the Northeast, including history, charming and old roots deep in the depths of our traditions and our past.

Bondoukou, capital of a province that have animated of all time, agricultural, pastoral and commercial, particularly productive and diverse, is one of our young and most dynamic new prefectures. The stunning urban boom that is his, for some months, testifies, moreover, very fortunately, recent choices were made and trust in the will and entrepreneurial leaders and residents of the region.

So you understand how nice it is to me that I speak of the Ivorian Government, to express the son and daughters of this country, our admiration and all our affection and to tell them, also, our deep gratitude for unforgettable welcome they were keen to book us since our arrival in their city.

I bring also to our many Ghanaian friends present today around us, fraternal salvation of C6ote Ivory. I see them as large and cordial participation in Bondoukou, in this special day, a wonderful symbol.

Symbol of the past, because if the required boundaries imposed by history, to separate peoples, there is no real border to divide the hearts and to weaken the links that a historical community and ethnic knew so deeply woven.

Symbol of the future also, like patients and constructive efforts undertaken with the Accra government to give to all of our political, economic and cultural character more harmonious and concrete.

Of relativity DE NOS ACTIONS

Let us rejoice in the day when the sun is in our hearts, but our joy will not make us forget the difficult fate of the land of men.

Every day, around the world, joins us and we hustles conveyed by the most advanced techniques and the fastest, information that makes us intensely participate in the hopes and troubles of the world and which requires our consciousness, relativity our actions.

It would be soulless not vibrate at these rhythms which, in turn, comforting and tear, and to have no heart for silence, facing the great dramas that still disrupt some parts of our universe, any substantial reflection and fraternal .

In the Far East, the most tragic today is maybe not the war but the fact that having realized its absurdity, the parties involved, no doubt sincerely willing, finally, to put it end, do not know how to build and restore peace. The most horrible is to think that these happy and quiet moments where I trust in you, the fate of thousands of innocent people under more plays of a certain sad face does not lose the name of humanitarian need the more noble.

As for this other conflict that never ceases to finish on the shores of the dead channel of a land of legend, he always eats the intransigence and hatred instead of tolerance, constructive dialogue and open the future.

These homes pain and tension already old, that one despairs of seeing off one day, were added, in recent months, particularly in East Africa and in the distant Pakistan, new outbreaks.

The conflict between our brothers in Uganda and Tanzania, which may cause the bursting of the economic community is African, is the fruit of some unfortunate intransigence. Formulate the fervent wish that this region of our continent quickly found peace, a peace that knows conquer, forever, unhealthy virus of intolerance and hatred.

As for the frightening situation Bengalis of East Pakistan, it seems to me to have become, specifically today, depressing the expression of that international solidarity can have ridiculous.

In less than one in this region was successively ravaged pat severe flooding, a tropical Cyclones who has everything Strait and killed on his way, by civil war, by a cholera epidemic and now by famine.

UN « VILLAGE PLANETAINE »

Faced with this series of disasters, has said world opinion and especially of rich countries, what did she aroused and she-that decided?

In a world where, at the time of "MASS MEDIA" I mentioned it a moment ago, some would like to see that we >> << global village has felt that the village was in fact , a clause of style and was sadly fair to say, on this occasion, that "collective emotion is inversely proportional to the distance between drama and those that perceive"

There is, in my opinion, even more serious is the impression given more or less secretly by some, that peoples are inevitably condemned to underdevelopment, that the races are subject to a higher fatality dose others and that there is in fact nothing to do if it is has to be their resignation.

Who would see here the expression of stubborn selfishness hypocritical, refusing to see the injustice and distress, soules consequences of natural conditions, demographic and political, which should be overcome before it is one day too late.

International solidarity is more than ever a necessity in a land where more than half the world's income remains shared by only seven percent of the nations, representing one of the world's population, become a reality and a reality that evening weight wide universal dramas and hunger.

It is not the fact, for rich countries attached to the Organization for Cooperation and Economic Development, to have increased in 1970, their public and private contributions, to the third world 4% in real terms, that fundamentally alter the data from these tragedies, especially when seen alongside the decline in public support, from donations and the increased role of the private sector in financing the development of poor countries.

This is not the do statement, a few weeks ago, the secretary general of the United Nations on the weight of military spending that can be calculated to comfort us. He tells us that in 1970, two hundred and four billion dollars was spent on armament, that is to say the equivalent of the annual income of all flies in developing countries.

We dream-believe and how then do not share that other affirmation of U Thant when he declares: "The time has come at the dawn of this decade, or

OTHER CONFLICTS

But there is also other conflicts and other situations of violence that sometimes to be less dramatic and bloody, not least reflect a profound imbalance and disturbing findings.

This "crisis of civilization" that "dress rehearsal of a great drama suspended, cited by Andre Malraux, at a particularly hit the retry history of his great country, are in fact only the contrasts of hues and complementary the same reality, that of a majority of unfortunate that manages not access decent and well-being and that of a minority of attic that does not know his master too full of well-being.

A REAL AWARENESS

In the late twentieth century who knows probably accelerated technological, social and cultural, not commensurate with what has been able to enroll in the history of humanity from creation, it is, however, not as clouds and tears, it is also big powerful waves and clear that demonstrate real awareness of the need to build and perfect a world that will support the demands of the time, while remaining far the man and his need for balance and dignity.

This evolution of the spirits who speaks with an increased strength and relevance, is its most remarkable expressions and most complete in the statements of His Holiness, Pope Paul VI, especially in its most recent apostolic letter, to the President of the Pontifical commission for justice and peace.

Claiming to want the head of the Catholic Church addressed in this message, in a tone full of measure and modernity, some of our time's most essential creams, since the commitment of Christians in politics to problems of urbanization, by the power of the image, property speculation and racism.

"Today," writes Paul VI, "the men aspire to be free from need and dependence. But this

The European adventure evidenced also in its way, a remarkable fertility.

Lying in the center of the large concentration of currents and harmonization of contemporary trends, extending the bounds of nationalism vain narrow, resentment of interest conveniently shoved, European construction prints its brand history of a prestigious continent and contributes significantly to the rhythm of life of today's world and give it meaning.

The recent Luxembourg agreement which marks the entry of Britain into the European club, will have extremely essential consequences for the current global balance. When it approaches the irresistible growth of the Japanese economy and the rise of Chinese military power and nuclear power, it is clear that the "bipolar" world that is shared, so far, the American and Soviet blocs, will be distributed in a larger number of partners and the effects for decades and generations to come, are incalculable.

That despite the extreme diversity dice realities, requirements and traditions of the States that compose it, Europe could, in any case, already cross from as milestones and provide, by its own dynamism, to Community policy, an astonishing consistency and a profound unity justifies our interest and admiration careful.

We can hardly imagine a more significant example of this ability to "confront the will of men with the resistance of things."

And we are well positioned in our regions in Africa to know that the resistance of things to say. Also appreciate us, at fair and very high merit us who work within regional groupings such as the board of the agreement, the West African Economic Community and OCAM, that the European will has already been able to be born and sustained increase and strengthen.

This adventure excites us especially as we are closely linked by the Yaoundé agreements in Europe, participating in a very intimate way, its progress as its shaking.

Although at this regard, the enlargement of the common market as the combination will result in new states of the Commonwealth, can not we do not cause problems, we, however, to see in the future that opportunity and invigorating obliged to reshape our vision and take a clearer conscience, at our economy and our industries, the harsh laws of international competition.

It is further necessary that the efforts we have already made, such as those we intend to do, with the support of our friends from abroad, are found not significantly reduced because articulate and define themselves away from us and too often, outside of us, the selling price and transport of our products.

THIS DRAMATIC HANDICAP

Sometimes there is a certain hypocrisy to want to discuss jointly the quantitative and qualitative improvement of the mechanisms and modalities of international cooperation, while continuing to so decide, unilaterally, the operating conditions of our natural resources as those of our equipment product needs.

This handicap dramatic and this deterioration will be imposed on the poorest countries as the great nations have not agreed to develop a coherent system of stabilization of prices of raw materials and a concerted organization of the market exchange Islands and certain mechanisms currency.

Some countries that are dear are already favorable. Our hope is that their position is, increasingly, shared, thus promoting a more balanced definition of international relations and healthier.

We followed in this regard, with very special attention, why hide, negotiations in recent months between the organization of petroleum exporting countries and large private companies. The establishment of a sliding scale for the price of crude oil, real "inflation tax", we appeared in this context, very promising since, for the first time, a similar agreement is acquired, for a commodity, it is true, very special, for countries of the Third World.

This agreement, that explains a lot for the strength of the common front of the producing states, has for us a timely opportunity for meditation and should strengthen our conviction to work with a will in a dynamic in favor of consolidation has regional structured and realistic.

We welcome in this regard the quality of actions, lives by our consulting and first efforts to expanded at immediate speaking from the east and west our thoughts on the progressive establishment of a regional common market.

The future of our continent parse through such contacts, concrete place of dialogue and constructive confident, much more than your one majorities, that famous forum, some activists of verbal belligerence gather in the name of ideologies , against political wisdom, dialogue and peace. The annual declarations of war have never shaken the strong and it is still the site they relate to the prospects of one big problem that matters to Africa, shined its cultural economic and social development in freedom and the peace. The harmonious future of our continent requires all African leaders a policy of peace with absolute neutrality, which requires among other conditions, the agreement between our countries, the use of dialogue for the resolution of all our disputes.

DECISIVE CONTRIBUTION OF YOUTH UNIT

I would now like to talk specifically about us, our dear Ivory Coast, its satisfactions and its problems.

Our satisfaction in eleventh anniversary of our sovereignty are numerous and justified.

Our unit is consolidating every day a little more, as evidenced in a sincere concern for national reconciliation, the recent meeting in Yamoussoukro, former political prisoners, as also evidenced by the accession to the highest positions of political responsibility technical and a growing number of young cadres, which should allow all the structures and workings of the nation to know even greater vitality, as evidenced especially the solemn commitment of all our students and students advocate now within the PDCI-RDA, crucible of national unity.

The fraternal union of peasants and workers is reinforced today, strengthened by unconditional acceptance of pupils and students to the national unanimity policy, a major concern of all Ivorians aware of their responsibilities they who are the hope and certainty of the country will bring to our old and glorious party of the new blood and this own creative enthusiasm of youth.

We will continue this policy of permanent dialogue, trusting and fraternal among all son of the country to give á the common house we build for so long all its force and all its fullness.

The people of Côte d'Ivoire has done enough repeatedly demonstrated its political maturity and sense of national solidarity for us to look ahead with confidence and trust.

We will, however, still a long time, we keep partisan ambitions, always inclined to give back to the old ancestral conflicts, a youth three timely, and reduce the demands forward to a few, the best interests of the national community.

The Ivorian remains always remain perfect and artisans will become its never too fervently to beautify and strengthen.

As for the overall situation of our economy and our finances, we have to congratulate us with their very good performance during the past months. Overall confidence of our friends from abroad and increased support of public bodies external financing evidenced, moreover, with enough force.

THE CHARTER OF OUR DEVELOPMENT

This growth, broadly strength, rhythm and its terms have recently been set by our 1971-1975 development plan.

This remarkable document, which has just been adopted by our National Assembly is the result of very close association, in planning committees, political bodies, ministries, administrative officials at the regional level, representatives of rural and socio-professional categories. It is for the future, the urgent charter of our development.

I will not dwell in detail on the three fundamental objectives that I had the opportunity to define with precision in February, during the official visit of President of the French Republic, Mr. Georges Pompidou. They tend, you know, to the continued strong growth, greater involvement of national economic activity and the promotion of Ivorian man.

I will only say that our plan will contribute greatly to strengthen the eyes of our friends abroad, a certain image made of mastery in the projections for the future, boldness in the choice of means and reasonable forecast liberalism in action and it is therefore important to do everything possible to read her full rationale and effectiveness best.

Our major operations of regional development and agricultural diversification, industry and mining, which continues successfully, we will help.

Vessels enter today in the new port of San Pedro, the main structure of the dam Koussou is now complete and the first migrants, driven by the rising waters to abandon their traditional, actually begin to settle, in very good conditions.

Agriculturally, palm and coconut programs continue to unfold in very favorable conditions, at the same time as efforts are accrusse to areas of returns and north, for an acceleration of development operations, the sweetbreads and da the sugar, that can help us reduce regional disparities, always worrying.

In search of a second wind industry which focuses our new plan, it is expected the implementation of important sets of production pulp and tires that should the development, more rational and more integrated , our forest wealth and rubber, ride aves extent, our first finished product is on the major developed world.

These comforting findings that reflect our present economic success, should, however, not make us complacent and our ongoing commitment to prepare balanced and judicious choice that demands the continuation of a steady and rapid growth.

We are, in fact, to fuel our growth, so closely related to the maintenance of the terms of trade and so helpless before the laws of supply and global demand that govern our main export products that we need defend in this vital area for our economic equilibrium, unreasonable optimism.

It is, moreover, other sensitive areas whose future depends more directly on our wisdom.

I want to specifically refer. Here, the growing role played by external funding in our development and to transactions that have been executed outside the framework of economic planning.

I insisted, there are some instant, about the latter point, the aspect "charter" of our plan. It is certain that if a necessary flexibility must prevail in execution, it is difficult to accept, at the risk of giving the document a theoretical incompatible with the effective execution of our goals, to multiply to excess unplanned achievements.

As no finance our public investment, it is essential that the share provided by domestic savings remains strong and that evening avoided, at most, in the future, the use of trade credit that increase our foreign debt inappropriately.

I would like also, solemnly attracted your attention on a set of problems that seem to become more and more concern and are linked to the increase in our personnel costs, the deterioration of the administrative function, the rural exodus and some deterioration of the living environment.

THE SERVANTS

The number of state employees increased by 7.5% per year since 1961, increasing the share of staff costs in the operating budget, from 44 to 50% during the same period. This proportion, Cortes, is not catastrophic, but it is time to question, more precisely, about the meaning of a development that does not always accompanied by an increased dynamism jà most sectors of our administration.

The impression given our current public service is a machine glue increasingly diverse and complex, responding to increasingly bad, the requirements of our development. Continue to increase and the number of civil servants, without conducting appropriate parallel qualitative actions involved more facilities of the leak before a rational and lucid policy.

Administration officers must not only be technically able to serve the state and administered, but they have also profoundly change the mentality and behavior that carry them, alas, much more often in the spirit of suzerainty and the spirit of service. Science, which are, moreover, not always at home is one thing, consciousness is another, equally essential. While too many agents first wish the rights for themselves and for other duties, it will fear that continues to deteriorate administration remains in our developing countries, an essential weapon of our success .

This is, in fact, and the issue is important to promote a development administration which poses a double problem of context First, education and training suite.

This lack of civic spirit, is not in fact exclusive to our officials and wins many sectors, particularly among young people, more prone to easy rapids careers and sources of profit as duties undertaken in the name of the general interest.

The danger is great to see so weaken gradually, state and predispose to dislocation all threats, especially as the Ivory Coast, received at development envy, arouses resentment and his rectitude and his political wisdom particularly hinder the demagogues of various persuasions, deeply sorry that our country still continues its march towards progress and well-being, as amazing way.

EDUCATION AND STATE COMPANIES

As for our education and training of our managers, we are forced to recognize that despite efforts more and more, made by the government, its effectiveness is not always commensurate with its cost and that it remains, at all levels, a lot to do to adapt our programs and teaching methods to the Ivorian realities and our economic and social goals of transformation of our society.

There is another trend of our administrative life it seems to me, also, due to slow in the future, is the proliferation of state corporations.

If it is good, has the opportunity to high-priority development operations are preferred to conventional administration, more flexible structures, it is important to bear in this area, any excess. It should, in particular, to avoid the creation of states in the state, each with their policy and, still without the excuse of efficiency, in get to weigh the loads of the nation, escaping to part to administrative, financial and policy centrally.

This control becomes more illusory than the excessive benefits granted to officers of these new organizations contribute á empty the traditional administration of their best ones, precisely, that might have helped to leave the supervisory authorities, effective power. It is time to reduce the shocking disparities president today to the remuneration of public officials and, more generally, to formulate a policy able to tighten controls high and harmonize, more effectively, interventions of these companies, all safeguarding their most positive aspects.

Linked, in part, to some of the shortcomings of our administration, also arises the difficult problem of migration and burning of our peasants to the cities.

In contact with modern life and this, of course, is not specific to the Ivory Coast, traditional societies burst á little bit, sparking confusion inhabit the exodus of peasants and especially young people that support to worse and worse, the gap between the possibilities of transformation of their environment and the real changes they can observe.

If it is an illusion to think, in most cases, a possibility of return to the land it is, in any case, become imperative analyzes the root causes of rural migration to reduce the pace and effects.

We will, for this, define new forms of intervention and assistance, knowing preserve our traditional values ​​which must be, lead an effective improvement of living conditions, both in terms of social and cultural facilities and in terms of increased material resources and opportunities data participates actively interested in the gradual transformation of their environment.

It is not clear in this respect, that the methods used so far, alent been particularly skilful and sufficiently respectful of our rural societies do own values ​​and desire for dialogue and participation of farmers.

The next creation of a rural promotion should lead to the definition of objectives and more middle animation appropriate methods, as well as in young adults and women. These objectives will not, however, achieved only if they become at the same time those of a regional knowledge to be an engine for the development of the country, as those, politicians and many companies that juxtapose intervention too often without integration effort, their actions to promote modern peasantry.

It is, in fact, the whole problem of regionalization that is posed and which it is time to give answers to the size of his questions and concerns it raises.

Means, which could be offered by new background rural development should parallel, funding for local projects that become concrete manifestation membership of the world these new shares.

UNDER OUR DEVELOPMENT

My dear compatriots, I want to talk about, before we part, a final issue that is close to my heart, is that the relationship between our economic development and our living environment.

If science, technology and the economy have become the new gods of our time, mechanistic civilizations and imprudent our world consumer societies of their deep marks, the man more justly about the place this "Industrial Vesuvius" to reserve a certain quality of life.

In an acceleration time from some quarters degradation, or we forget that "I gross national product Reversed Image, gross domestic pollution" and that urbanization is too often synonymous with permanent aggression and nuisances. It is important to ask whether there is not some contradiction between rates of economic growth and protection of our natural environment and psychological history.

It is not a question here only of the daily fight against pollution and concrete or for the protection of nature, it is, much more comprehensive way, book the man in the new world industrial, conditions of physical and moral development which are acceptable.

This is not to take refuge with melancholy or bitterness in reassuring images of a bygone era, but to provide, parallel to the quantitative improvement of living standards, a qualitatively better living environment, which remains at the dimension of the human being.

If it is not too late to ask this, in Ivory Coast, it does not seem to me, if I believe the pollution and degradation of some of our sites and our shores, whether too early.

Apart from a very general reflection that the ministerial departments concerned should quickly be associated, on the need for and modalities of a real environmental policy in our country, it is urgent to define, in the short term, shares in a particularly sensitive and priority sector, namely housing and urban development, particularly in our inland towns and villages.

While many efforts were already undertaken in these centers, which resulted in the successful transformation of the conditions of comfort, safety and hygiene, we must recognize that this improvement was often achieved at the expense of architectural quality and the picturesque and harmony of certain traditional ensembles, particularly well integrated in their natural setting, is hardly found in most new achievements.

There would be serious in the name of legitimate aspirations for a modernized habitat, it continues to transform many of our cities and our villages, towns site without greenery and soulless.

The risk is great in uniformly imposing these anonymous silhouettes and cold, which for too look like, be like nothing, create more functional universes, perhaps, but completely disembodied.

It is certainly possible in this vital area and in view of the general protection of the sites, firstly, our tourism ambitions, on the other, to implement schemes for reconciling the financial and technical requirements a comfortable habitat and requirements of aesthetics and a certain preservation of the originality of our land.

The Ivory Coast is too beautiful, too harmonious and serene, for that responsibility be taken blindly destroy its natural beauty and its most authentic riches.

The man went to the moon but can not yet make a flamboyant or birdsong. Let our dear country irreparable errors that could, in the future, bring to regret its birds and trees.

My frankness could you appear rude, today, and severe some of my comments.

It is that it is the head of state to which you have given and renewed many times your loving trust, nothing hide his joy that is immense and concerns that are vivid.

Our dear Ivory Coast is too much part and too vigorously engaged on the path of progress, to run, ridiculous way, the risk of slowing sent.

The harshness of some minor selfish dice and talkative, whose showy prosperity is not always share lied to merit, which does not blind us to the immense quality of work and the heart of our masses of town and country.

If we can be justifiably proud of our past and read later if the seeds we have sown, have already given rise to wonderful harvests, our children's future will be what we will make of our present. We have, in this respect, very heavy responsibilities, the size of the innumerable difficulties that await us, but also to the image of a young, rich and dynamic that is built in the liberty tolerance and dialogue .

If politics is the art of the possible, it is also the science of lucid forecasts.

So let us together more than ever united and confident in for our great people, prepare a bright future because of shared prosperity and fraternal solidarity that deserves our dear Ivory Coast.

Long live the Ivory Coast in fraternal union of all her children! "

