Ivorians Ivorians, My dear compatriots,

New Year holidays are traditionally hours of peace and joy. This is for all of us, too, the time to ask ourselves, with hope and with clarity on the new pages that will help write the destiny, to think together about the recent past and the future of our dear country, meditate, finally, the lessons of the last months of the history of a world we share, increasingly, bursts and dramas.

Long ago our earth had been on a short period of upheaval if: Popular China has now entered the concert of International Organizations, England joined the big house of Europe, 'already fragile edifice of global mechanisms of trade and the currency has found a little more, shaken, while the continent is feverish again and in the old Ireland of old torments revived.

In other latitudes, continents are awakening to the heady aware of their wealth and their new dynamism: it's Australia side of the world and its virgin lands to the extraordinary fertility mining, it is also the Brazil, with its hundred million men to come and its prodigious growth that fascinates us and we all the more important, that part of its vitality rests on the harmonious components of a multiracial society with obvious African ties.

A TRANSFER IRREVERSIBLE

Whatever happens now to the future, the whole world has become fundamentally different, the change is abrupt, irreversible, and the redistribution of forces in politics and the economy, such, that we will be difficult in the short term, to grasp all expressions and all consequences.

New Giants appeared on the narrow table of the two great empires born of war, complicate they still certain balances, often made of terror or force, or, on the contrary, they will weigh-sharing is a too accuses so far, could be distressing for those who have not had, for them, the weight of their just cause?

What will happen on this chessboard disrupted, our world, the Third World, as we say so?

Our Continent he found in the enlargement of the European Economic Community, material feeding fears or, conversely, the expected opportunity to make more harmonious and credible Eurafrica in the bonds of association and cooperation strengthened our earnings happy?

WE ARE WORRIED

For now, and despite the comforting news that we come from certain countries, we remain worried.

Monetary and trade shocks have, once again, dangerously shaken global economic edifice already fragile and increased our apprehensions, along with the drop in cocoa prices questioned, significantly, some of our revenue forecasts.

If very recent decisions taken between the Great Powers reflect the will of restoring balance more satisfying and more concerted, we are forced to recognize that the countries of the Third World are still as foreign to the essential confrontations and still dramatically dependent on consequences these debates.

As for the possibility of obtaining the necessary increase in the overall volume of development assistance, it appears to have faded as are complicated at the same time, negotiations on this aid untying.

There will also, no doubt, much to fear from the effects of recent events, if they persisted, the efforts we intend to diversify our industries and exports of manufactured goods to the Great Industrial Markets.

The planetary selfishness remains the rule and international mutual aid, more often repeated formula implemented.

"The most powerful countries", said recently the Secretary General of the United Nations, "have only rarely been able to rise above suspicions, fears and mistrust resulting from differences between their ideologies, objectives and designs they have of the world's interest. Overall, rivalry Nations continued to be the dominant factor in international life. "

The Group of "Seventy-Seven," recently met in Peru, to prepare for the third session of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, has understood, striving to form a common front, alone even in a world where first count the balance of power of the voice of the poorest countries. It is á Hopefully this Front remains as united as possible in a few months, Santiago de Chile, that the main industrial Nations agree to much better comply with international rules in the field of trade, the rules of which the Director of International Monetary Fund have said, himself, that they "constitute an important protection for the smaller and weaker countries against the risk of see the largest and most powerful fair use policy exchange and trade countries for their own benefit. "

OPENING AND PEACE

Ivory Coast continue, meanwhile, whatever misunderstandings she meets and trial of intent made to it, its open policy of peace with the outside world, more and more aware of the urgent need of dialogue to resolve tensions and conflicts of whatever origin and whatever nature.

I would like to reiterate, in this regard, the friendly attention with which we followed the course of the visit of President Banda, South Africa, and the act of courage and faith she testifies. I would also, make today a solemn tribute to President TSIRANANA, who was the pioneer of this new policy and I realism and lucidity should be, for many, a shining example.

Africa has a great need of peace, deep peace, and its role in the community of free and sovereign nations, and a better balance of the world will be more vigorous and freely accepted that the face she will be that of the weighting and serenity.

Hail also those more numerous, and I think here, instead, to His Holiness Pope Paul VI, who struggle to bring about a more just world.

I can not say enough nobility and fervor of the pilgrims of peace that nothing discouraged in their relentless pursuit of harmony of a world hit and a little crazy, which requires lower the laws of its imbalances.

SPEAKING of ourselves

I wish, now, you talk more about ourselves, Ivorians and Ivorian we are, the problems that we care and society as we strive, each in our place, with our responsibilities, our ambitions and own qualities to lead and build.

I felt in particular that the time had come to express to you, in friendship and frankly, my concerns and fears.

The défficile duty and ungrateful of Heads of State is to know when it is time again attract the attention of those who grant them, always, their affectionate confidence on the weaknesses and ills of the community of blood , interest and feeling that constitutes a nation, and that nation, the Ivorian nation, is too expensive for me shut up longer my worries.

No doubt, 'he would be easy today as I do regularly, to take stock comforting to our efforts, our successes and our legitimate expectations.

It is true that our country remains the happy haven of political stability and economic prosperity enviable, at the service of the noblest ideals. It is true that our Ivory Coast led since independence, with much conviction and sincerity, a liberal humanism experience or aspirations wellness find expression in greater freedom, where harmonious consistency of religions and races is not a vain formula and where the great and serious problems are struggling under a confrontation, as wide and as confident as possible, of all currents of opinion.

Our jails are empty of political prisoners, our diet is not a police state, the Dialogue is our only constraint, and each passing year, the average standard of living rise, in fairly reasonable proportions that knows the difficulties the traditional Third World states.

Our pride is great to see our country cited as an example, and it is not a week passes without testimony, from outside, we confirm the wisdom of our choices and the realism of our businesses.

The year just ended was good and important in many ways. She saw, in fact, the Educational Television become a reality for more effective training of our children and adults soon, the first ships to enter the new port of San Pedro and the tourist center of Assini open it a few days ago, speeding, happily, our first tourist facilities.

I considered necessary the creation of a Ministry of Scientific Research, considering instead that capital takes science in the harmonious development of a country.

I also found it necessary, having taken an even clearer awareness of the vastness and complexity of the problems with the functioning and adaptation of our education and training system and our cultural development, to entrust a General Staff wider, care to follow, with more attention, this vital sector to the nation's balance.

Our agricultural diversification operations continue, meanwhile, to proceed with vigor, while the future textile plant Dimbokro revolves, gradually, the Ferkessédougou sugar complex is developing according to plan and is continuing, serious and concrete way, studies and contacts for the exploitation of the deposit of iron Man the region and implementation of complex pulp paper and tires, which we expect they shape for the decade to come, the new industrial face of the Ivory Coast.

From a broader perspective, economic activity was very strong, exceeding the balance of our Commercial always sensitive, and the pace of our progress, in line with forecasts of our Plan. The image that we offer to Africa and the world remains a health and reasoned confidence picture in the future.

THE DANGERS OF EASY complacency

Therefore, it is necessary today more than yesterday, so that remains and grows this success, to avoid the dangers of easy complacency, and analyze with lucidity and courage that can sometimes hide the image and to question our economic weaknesses and what I call the unfortunate materialization of our society, become in my eyes, as aspects closely related a recent and rapid evolution.

Our fragility, it was enough the past monetary shocks, I mentioned it a moment ago, and lower prices for cocoa, for us to take a clearer conscience and we relearn that we will stay a long time, dangerously exposed to external burdens. The terms of trade are not close, in a world that continues to impose on us, in the most casual way, and most disturbing, to enable us to establish our growth and welfare on bases sustainably predictable and stable. You should know, without it hunker down and do nothing, take our party and find or recover first, ourselves, the various levels resources, capable of reducing the most harmful effects these inevitable dependencies.

It would be too easy to not look at the outside of our borders, the explanation of our weaknesses, our shortcomings or our possible setbacks.

It is, indeed, the evils that we are clean. They are related in particular to the relative importance remained too much of our primary agricultural production, low productivity too many sectors of our economy, the irrationality of some distribution networks, the profitability of companies remains too dependent advantages granted by the State, the shortcomings finally of private savings.

WEAKNESSES OF DIRECTORS

It is the more serious, born weaknesses of men and I think here in the first place, our administration system and some of those in charge.

`I think those, fortunately a minority, who, soon invested in a more or less of the authority of the state, not only appear to have a very relative awareness of the duties involved in their new duties but divert for their benefit or the benefit of a few, or all of these powers.

I think of those for whom accession to an important post mark an end in itself and that summarize their ambition and dedication to the born social consecration of a title they endorse as a simple peel, those who reduce their greatness and servitude to their personal interests and that dedication to the public good is a formula especially happy and often expressed, that their remains at the level of everyday behavior, totally foreign.

Absenteeism, tardiness, laziness, indiscipline, must die of authority, become much complaining and reasons for depressing findings.

It is however not that difficult to set an example and demonstrate in the life of every day, a citizenship and a sense of responsibility that should be, for the measurement, redone and benefits granted.

But there are more serious and a more concerned, these are some fondant corruption which seem to win various.

The forms are diverse, where capitalists primary discrete but always evil and harmful.

Our duty is to stop these. The measures contained in the Finance Act and which will be strictly enforced, should enable us to maintain intact the credit of the Ivory Coast.

As for the methods of work, they are often characterized by the heaviness, formalism, hierarchical rigidity, silos between departments and ministries, lack of delegation of authority and the expansion of responsibilities.

The remedies are not simple. I see them in part in the implementation of a genuine master plan for administrative reforms and a more suitable training of our staff, training in both theoretical and hands more permanent, relying more on methods active teaching and that will lead to more specialized profiles agents whose motivations, skills and behavior, would make in Abidjan and inside the country, most capable agents á missions development and better able meet the expectations and needs of rural and urban populations.

SOCIAL DESSOULLIBRES

If our fragility is due, in part, by the lack of men and the inadequacy of our structures, it is also the islands believe health imbalances in our society.

History teaches that the development of a harmonious economy and unity of a nation are hardly compatible with social inequalities, laughed when they become too unfair and too strong.

If it is legitimate to aspire to a welfare increasing, it is natural to seek to increase its assets and earnings, it is not normal that these aspirations and this research unfairly benefit some at expense of the majority.

The desire to appear and the thirst to own no more stops they do not blind some, and will we prefer, to a collective growth economy, the economy of `possession at all costs, which dangerously embodies the values ​​of a society at the expense of the virtues of the mind and heart demands?

This development is particularly worrying that we must persuade us increasing difficulties imposed on us become a less favorable general economic conditions. The budget of 1972 will express enough in this regard, our news.

The Ivorian, in general, not a taste of savings. This is a sad statement, weakness, a deficiency detrimental to the better future of the country.

If he wants to participate in the rational development of our beloved country. It shall, without delay, be aware of the necessity of saving and stop living beyond its means.

I announced it a few weeks ago, executives of our Party, the need to engage in as real a policy of austerity and distributed as fairly as possible.

What does that mean !

This means that the coming austerity measures will affect, in any way, those, peasants, workers and small employees who contribute in a major way, the Ivorian prosperity. This means in particular that the actions provided for modernization of the peasant world will receive the means and funds that justify their importance and hopes we place in them.

This means that a priority, general, will be given to the interior regions, the level of social facilities, administrative and cultural, as in infrastructure and certain agricultural and industrial facilities.

This means that it is time that the country is turning to this second decade, to the effective satisfaction and not just intellectual and verbal, the more humble aspirations, those who too often do not know or can not express their basic needs, but who feel injustice enough to feel great bitterness.

TRUE AUSTERITY

Austerity justly distributed this means also a lifestyle of more consistent state to our means, personal commitments and stabilized operating expenses, missions abroad less frequent and unnecessarily burdensome, operations very carefully selected investment, economic choices strictly comply with the objectives of the Plan, limitations expenditure grants and a deep awareness, at all levels, the new constraints as Impose this situation.

That disappear, too, demobilizing these expectations of the State which, in too many organizations, prevent officials ask their real problems that are rigorous management or commercial dynamism.

The control of the State, it operates through the channel of ministries or through the Ministries of Economy and Finance and Planning, to make more accurate, monitoring, regardless of area of ​​practice, and that administration officials assume here more than they do, responsibilities which are theirs.

AUSTERITY THAT IS NOT ONLY OF OTHERS AND THAT BELIEF OF HIS NEED NOT be reduced NOT A THEME LOUNGE, but should result, DAY AFTER DAY, AND ALSO HOW CONTAGIOUS AS POSSIBLE IN PROPOSALS IN BEHAVIOR AND ACTS!

The chances of our country are very large, let us therefore preserve and everyone, in all conscience, make the general interest prevail over the errors supporters and short-term selfishness.

CONTEST ALL

I have to continue the work of national construction and preserve our unity, need all of you:

My Ministers, first, which I expect they confer more in the future, their plans and actions.

Elected Nation and activists of our party and I look vigilance and increased zeal in the fight against racism and tribalism, and in creating a climate of dialogue, tolerant and confident with the people .

Peasants and workers that I know the seriousness and just waiting to be understood and supported.

Young people and students who demonstrate, through concrete actions, their budding desire to participate in the consolidation of national unity, but I like their awareness sometimes the sacrifices made by the community.

Teachers I know the broad merits but I would like to see participate more actively, the Essential thoughts on the necessary and profound changes in our education and training system.

Officers from the Public Service finally together, I implore solemnly today, to a consciousness of their duties, more obvious and everyday.

I, also, need all those with responsibilities in the private sector involved, of essential way to conduct business in this country. I wish they understand, as many already have been able to do, that our policy of Ivorian nationals of the economy, far from being against them and despite themselves, must be with them, to our mutual benefit, and we must together devise new forms of association, participation and cooperation in the financial, industrial and technology better suited to large data of economic growth become a kind, too, new .

LIBERALISM AND CONFIDENCE

They need to know that the Government and the President of the Republic remain fundamentally attached to the Economic Liberalism rules and the free play of the mechanisms of a system that we earned their trust and confidence of the outside world.

This trust we will be more friendly renewed that we can save or acquire a mentality of effective manager, integrating, equally, the qualities of the manager and the virtues of humanism.

I would so very general, that the civil service and comfort to the sting of easy profits, succeed religion merit, effort and a job well done, scrupulous compliance, active solidarity and true brotherhood.

I would much, you will say, chainmail end of 1971, but I do requires a lot of that because my love for you is immense, and our country is too happy and too good to deserve, to want to win bad, too lose.

Our destiny is too unique and too our fruitful harvests, already, not to warn you today. Our legitimate race wellbeing must remain mastered, shared and serene.

There will be no true happiness for us as in research and definition of harmonious relations, not only with things and material goods, but also with the beings that surround us and with life.

Any true advancement assumes overtaking, and it is important "to have". You should know 'being' too, for oneself and for others, and I have too high an awareness of yourself not to bet on your first magnitude.

AWARENESS REVIEW

It is an examination of conscience that I invite you all, on this last day of the year, for sure, because I know you well, you know, again, meet my expectations and allay my fears.

Let this coming year be sweet and good for you, for your children and for your family, it brings you a lot of joy, kindness and love and it gives you new opportunities to believe in yourself Similarly, the beauty of the world and in our Ivory Coast beloved, always more peaceful, more united, more confidence and fraternal!

That the Almighty help us and come to the world peace and weapons, for each of us, peace of heart and mind!

This is the affectionate wish your President, your confidant, your friend, the one who never stopped hearing from you and strive to give the best of himself

