"Ivorians Ivorians, My dear compatriots.

Twelve years ago now that our dear Ivory Coast acceded to political independence and the right to make its voice heard in the concert of free and sovereign nations.

I would like, on this solemn occasion, our thoughts turn with gratitude and respect towards those of our activists, the dramatic hours of our struggle, agreed the hardest sacrifices to enable today to the Ivorian community celebrate in the peace and joy, this celebration of newfound dignity, peace of mind and for national unity. Whether heading directly, forever in our memories and in our hearts, like the revered author of the most glorious pages of our young history!

What this fraternal evocation has Odienne to reason and context seems to me all the more significant as the city that welcomes us since our arrival, as brightly générisées of da and spontaneity has always been at the crossroads of historical and current human essential in this region of Africa.

Zone pass or establishing Sénoufo migration, Mandingo and Malinke attachment point and fulfillment of the famous kingdom of Kaba-Toure, all combine to make of this land savannah, happy symbol of the most authentic African traditions and give people who occupant, this bold character, enterprising and industrious, so precious in the world that is ours.

As for the harmonious blending of races that results, it seems to me, too, bear witness, rarely, the need to give the problems of construction of the Ivorian nation, of serenity imprints answers, understanding and generous tolerance.

I see, finally, in this country border so brave, so faithful and proud, the symbol of the deep friendship that binds us to the two large states surrounding it and I would like to take the opportunity that this anniversary gives me, mallons to tell our brothers and Guineans who share today our happiness, how happy I am for their presence among us and how our regional solidarity seems to me, in these hours, thanks to them, comforting and concrete

Qu'Odienné, became, for a few days, the capital of our beloved Ivory Coast, is also a favorite rendezvous of the great African community and the universality of our values ​​and our hopes!

One of those expectations - and you know, my dear friends, how expensive it is to me - is to see dialogue with Ivory Coast was made, historically, the indefatigable apostle, to become, finally, and the undisputed rule of our world so that hatred, fanaticism and blind violence gives way to prevent and resolve conflicts of all kinds, the spirit of cooperation the most shared and most sincere.

Throughout recent months, many events have appeared, both in Africa and on other continents, express a more demanding aware of these necessities.

We welcome this, seeing in this vision of relations between nations expressing a promising maturity and guarantee a more balanced future because less tied to binding onslaught of will power and retrograde sectarianism.

We have seen India and Pakistan to end a dramatic conflict while both Germany continued their rapprochement and the South are Korai and neighboring North, amorçaient, after twenty-two years of tension, fructueus contact.

Á As the recent meeting in Rabat, the Organization of African Unity, it is, tans doubt, one of the most remarkable manifestations of this new mindset.

Verbal climbing and twining that were too often the board, made up a tone, debates and resolutions that reflect a responsible management and realistic real problems of our continent and will resolve in a climate of harmony and true brotherhood.

Whether these meetings have also led to significant events are also the solemn reconciliation entry of Morocco, Algeria and highly of President Habib Bourguiba, express enough new atmosphere of relaxation and peace that governed their conduct .

The summit and the spirit of Rabat were, in fact, the extension and the other consecration happy endings, which in the months before, saw, in turn, the Sudan to end a long fratricidal war our brothers in Senegal and Guinea and the two banks of the Congo, leading to much more peaceful and confident political relations.

Along with these actions, the new UN secretary-general was traveling in Namibia and Pretoria to forge ahead, with all parties, a courageous dialogue that could lead to the fulfillment of the legitimate aspirations of a people still subject to foreign domination and to the progressive adoption of race relations rules that would no longer flout the most basic human rights in Africa.

It remains, more generally, to ensure that all territories of the continent where there is still the spirit, domination access very quickly, in turn, dignity and the right to freely dispose of their own destiny.

A NEW WIND

The great of this world, themselves, did blow, somewhat unexpectedly, a new wind on relationships jusqu'lei too often dominated by invective or monologues. In Beijing, the largest poor countries could agree to meet in the conditions that we know, the richest countries in Moscow the leaders of the two nuclear superpowers were able to finally get agreed, after thirty months of negotiations on limiting their nuclear arsenal, could mean that the road to peace appear finally, holders of more promise than the old trails of the cold war.

That the virtues of dialogue have been shown to also astonishingly can not, of course, we confirm the correctness of our choice, but we want to be sure that in this huge game of chess that is facing our earth, countries poor have become something other than plans or privileged theaters of the most tragic conflicts.

We want to be certain that these spectacular peaks debouched on anything other than scholars reversals of alliances and, for example, on a more equitable transfer to the Third World of the riches of the universe.

Some events still current as far as information and recent conferences make us unfortunately fear that the appearance of things continues to hide painful and persistent realities.

How to forget especially in this day of reverence and joy, tragedies of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia and all that they mean to offend human person and the right of everyone to peace and happiness.

Has it not the feeling of being here, as affileurs before the new rules of an atrocious game where the war seems to have become a poor people's disease and where the poor is seen to buy rich means to tear and use the rich land of the poor for experimentation of their most cruel weapons?

How, secondly, do not despair of the justice and wisdom of men when one learns that consecrated place in the world military spending is thirty times greater than the aid given to the Third World, where the UN Secretary-General reminds us that a third of the world population owns eighty-seven percent of gross national product of humanity while the other two thirds have to settle the rest and when the president of the World Bank we reported that the Entai updates financial resources available to the Third World by the rich countries has reached to date, half of the target for the development decade while parallel to the service debt ", that is to say, the burden of non-repayment, rose to poor countries," two times faster than export earnings which should fund it. "

Who will dare, ever, say, before these inequalities increasingly unacceptable and imbalances born of the most unbridled egoism and of the mercantile interests, that one day the great revolt of misery will not break?

Who will dare to meet the outcomes of the Third United Nations Conference on Trade and Development saw, once again, sadly express the helplessness of the poor and the rich unconsciousness?

Apart from the adoption of a plan of special measures in favor of the poorest nations, nothing concrete and important has been achieved in Santiago or on reforming the international monetary system, nor on upcoming negotiations to liberalize world trade, nor on the establishment of a link between special drawing rights and development finance.

As for the most essential problem, that the price of commodities, it was actually retracted, summarizing is to make recommendations to the World Bank which, on this point, as on others, it may be feared, will only join the endless procession of pious wishes as qu'innombrables ,.

When you know the misgivings expressed by the coffee consuming countries to the demands pourtants based group of major producers and when we know how to trample discussions implementation of an international cocoa agreement, one restaurant, we indeed justly aseptic on the ability of international organizations, as well prepared as they are, to respond effectively to promote the conclusion of price stabilization agreements for raw materials.

Do we know, secondly, that in ten years, from 1960 to 1969, the value of world exports of commodities, excluding oil, rose only thirty seven percent and; with oil, rose only thirty seven percent and, with oil, sixty three percent, while exports of industrial products increased parallel one hundred and fifty five percent?

The reality of the deteriorating terms of trade, it is there, depressing and precise, and all the heavier for the balance of payments of the poor countries that over three quarters of their sales consist of exports of raw materials and tropical products.

Once again, and whatever the efforts of some of our dearest friends, the "NO" to the privileged prevailed, Chile, favored, it is true, if indeed he or need the be - but the selfishness of the wealthy sometimes needs to apologize easy - for some divisions.

The ideology, geography and history as much as the divergences of interest and lead development inequalities, in fact, often make ineffective and fragile constitution of united fronts, at the Third World states. Solidarity is difficult and thankless thing and selfishness has few boundaries.

And yet! What hope something else, the most powerful of this world, good words and resolutions hypocrites if does not create, at the lowest, habits of thinking, believing and build together and if not will not impose more definite and conscious way, the imperatives of common realistic actions, appropriately chosen, concerted long and vigorously conducted.

Africa expects of us as we went out of its underdevelopment and we can not meet his expectation that existing, by acting and by requiring together ever more closely connected and more, exceeding the anachronism of our petty quarrels and our own love wounds.

The isolation policy is damaging economic isolation but is even more so. There will be genuine and lasting peace in Africa unit in a development for the benefit of all States and, in each State to the benefit of all, a development that can result in the same spirit of solidarity, all our peoples towards progress and welfare.

Let's look, in fact, what is happening around us in the world!

Do we not establish new global balances in sets of larger and larger?

THE EXAMPLE OF EUROPE

Do we not see Europe grow stronger and grow, overcoming gradually, which could, divide far, and his discomfort but do irreversible paths of cooperation and unity, only sources in the late twentieth century, credibility, strength and greatness?

This Europe, history has always bruised from inexpiable wars, and which remains subject to the most diverse and most contradictory influence of sharing traditions, is today already become what it is, should be a deep meditation occasion!

What example exhilarating for us Africans who strive with patience and determination to promote regional economic groupings, to the extent of our problems, this European adventure!

How, in the perspective of a Euro-Africa solidarity and balanced and ambitions that are important to the harmony of the world, not to be sensitive to the dynamism and coherence as fruitful a building and not think that the time the union has come, also for Africa!

Let us prepare and deserve this time, in wisdom, in mutual respect of our national identities, convinced of our complementarities and the assurance that the juxtaposition of our solitude does not lead to anything and that the voice of Africa will be strong and listened as if she knows to speak with clarity and rigor in the union, in brotherhood and peace.

HARMONY, JUSTICE PROGRESS

Still it is necessary that within the borders of each of our States, including our dear Ivory Coast, are established and strengthened in parallel harmony of societies, justice and progress that will meet not only the fruits of growth, as positive, and as promising as they are earned and you know, on this, my dear compatriots, whatever our present difficulties, how serious are our pride and justified reasons and confidence in the future.

If economic growth is indeed essential and all the more essential that we still have to cross together very long and very hard course, it's not all, because the development of a nation is itself an indivisible whole and demanding that includes other constraints and present other material and economic ambitions.

This growth may even ultimately, if we are not careful, we forget more easily, by its own success, which also contributes to the fundamental equilibrium of a nation.

It's not about, well, discuss, as is currently the case in some developed countries, the merits and demerits of what is now called zero growth.

There are luxuries we can not assume, as is broader still, for many men, women and children of this country, the gap that separates the happy satisfaction of basic needs of nutrition, health and education and their collective accession to the overriding rights to hygiene, comfort, culture and well-being.

If we are sensitive to environmental problems, it is clear that underdevelopment remains our first pollution.

This however is not a reason to overlook what in our current progress, can be the source of blockages, deficiencies and inequalities. While it is important to choose and apply with clarity and rigor, a growth model. It is appropriate to remember that this model must be part of a whole civilization, fuller and wider.

It is necessary supports and fruitful springs, it is still necessary that they are deployed in a universe where the progression is as synonymous with progress.

I think there are in this area for the future, reason to drive our thinking on some of the aspects necessary but complex of our industrial development.

There is another concern that occupies me is that of the relationship between the state and the central administrative authority which expresses and all regional authorities that the prolonged and that the charge to support and 'animate actions.

If it is normal, because we have taken over our destiny than twelve years and because the continued strong growth will require, long ago, a strong mastery of the central power over all phenomena of development, that the state has adopted a cautious attitude towards the issue of regionalization, it became expedient, if only because development involves change and because the excesses of centralism secreting too often inefficient routines, brakes and tensions that are being actively pursued studies already undertaken in this area, particularly by some ministries and the National Committee for administrative reform.

What if he will, in fact, if not define gradually a consistent and flexible policy that reflects regionalization in terms of regional planning, regional division and administrative institutions and participation and focuses on structures adapted to the treatment of development problems inside the country.

SOCIAL AND CULTURAL ASPECTS

This is the problem I would like to discuss at length before you, social and cultural aspects of the Ivorian development taken as the broadest sense or what is the same, the right proportions to preserve or establish between the different components of the Ivorian nation, the state and the Ivorian man.

It is a first point that was given to me to discuss already, repeatedly, but to which I would return because he seems to me to become more and more worrying is the growing inequality sharing the fruits of growth.

It should not, in fact, maintain feelings of good conscience easy by simply denouncing the blindness presiding on the international stage, the distribution of wealth in the universe.

It is not necessary that we, too, in Ivory Coast, our Third World and our wealthy because injustice and selfishness of others do not fade and will not justify our wrongs and our own selfishness.

We would like, in this regard, that the livelihoods of some are still in the image of their merit and that the daily behavior of many is the most accurate reflection of intent repeated statements on the solidarity and the necessary fraternities.

Trying too hard to embrace and seem, for a minority that too often summarizes its horizons and its reasons for the profit at any cost and operation of facilities that can provide certain functions, we can not lead to shorter or longer term, as dramatic outbursts.

Let us very clearly conscien, while there is still time!

Let us, together, to understand what the difficulties that could arise recently in some companies could mean, in this emerging industrial society, for the benefit of our economy, has become one of our most fruitful realities.

Do we not see here beyond the immediate circumstances and causes of well known conflict, which all the parties involved: employees, employers, unions and governments, must find, in the most frank dialogue and more respectful of the laws and the dignity of all, explanations and remedies, the first expressions, more or less consciousness, difficulty inserting a new class into the very particular that are born, in large production units, inflows of modern technology and the constraints of productivity?

Later, once the established administrative structures, it will be time, no doubt, to the problem that is complementary him some decentralization to the benefit of local authorities.

The important thing is, more specifically, to be aware, at all levels, worsening imbalances between Abidjan and all it represents and the interior regions and all they expect.

It is high time that the will look to meeting the expectations of a rural world without which our proud capital would never have become what it is today.

It is time to give our prefects and sub-prefects our means to initiate and coordinate the necessary actions and become the wish to renew our farmers the assurance that utilities and all the living environment improvements including they need not be sacrificed.

I would like, in this regard, that all the media available to us, including radio, television and press, turn, even more attentive and more adapted to the realities of the rural world, they to express more extensively and more accurately the aspirations and ensure that they know, with the support and most effective relay of our activists, our staff and our teachers, a much more massive dissemination of knowledge of the events and words order that shape the nation's life.

PROBLEMS OF YOUTH

How, in this evocation of the socio-cultural aspects of our development, not now be brought to talk about the problems of youth?

I wonder is especially today there relationships that have developed between adults and young people on the one hand, between the state and youth on the other, are sufficiently clear and their importance and originality have been properly analyzed and collected.

Our son and our girls are, and I believe that this will happen more and more, both children of their age than our own children. In a society in a state of rapid change and a time of often traumatic external forces, they, more than others, perhaps, difficult to be located vis-a-vis some traditional models that fall gradually into disuse without yet being replaced mostly by others that are satisfactory and appropriate.

This difficulty often results in a deviation from their main motivations - deviation they do not also have a monopoly -; they tend to not understand the happiness in its most material form, ie, money; participation in development is more often seen as an opportunity to participate in the benefits of growth as the need to participate in the effort required to produce them. As for training, it is considered more as a prerequisite for access to social status than an investment necessary to support professional responsibilities.

These human phenomena are important and how they evolve will depend on Ivorian profile of tomorrow and, therefore, the characters of the future Ivorian society, social balance, its creative power, its focus on development tasks and on a more general level, his happiness.

I do not believe that the policy that we have followed so far, in youth, is perfectly coherent and agree that all the living forces of the nation are wondering, in the future, the opportunity to a new dialogue between young and old, as a support much more specific and systematic social group are children and youth in our political guidelines as to the programming of our development activities.

REFORM OF EDUCATION

Similarly, we will it, it is fundamental revision of deep and fast guidelines that have hitherto governed the objectives and progress of our training apparatus, in particular to seek a more obvious fit between opportunities in the employment market and diplomas from our teaching and conducting necessary actions for education outside school, to ensure promotion of means to too many young people who remain without qualification.

Whatever the efforts made so far in terms of television education, in particular, it is wise to recognize that our education system is too heavy a financial burden for the results it prevails and that it developed mostly on the sidelines of economic growth there has helped.

Failing to ensure, so far, insufficient links between the production function and the training function, he always responds in May to the priority needs of African countries, developing countries, such as ours.

Our government leaders and members of the National Commission set up by the Party, are aware of these shortcomings and these evils and the need to bring are decisive and holistic responses.

I solemnly invite today to accelerate the preparation of the necessary deep reforms demanded changes in our educational system. I wait in parallel for all teachers, whether Ivorian or foreign, they assume the success of future measures by agreeing to challenge with humility and enthusiasm, some methods of thought and action, the benefit of the implementation of a pedagogy that would be development before inheritance or usual.

They will contribute in a positive and uplifting way to the creation of a socio-cultural Ivorian model, which primarily benefit our youth, a model that wants to both African and universal influence and which will develop gradually from basic guidelines that will give our company.

THE ROLE OF CULTURE

I just talked to sociocultural model and you see how many are related, dependent and complementary, all these notions of growth, education and culture and how, I like to repeat that our development is a whole that can not be satisfied with only numbers and graphics production.

The economy can not be the only measure of the man, so it's essential to now give a new dimension to our development, integrating, except much more complete, culture.

A culture that is neither solitary nor disembodied and who can compete and thrive in the sources found and preserved our traditions and our most genuine values, while remaining available to external currents in what they can get more exhilarating and more assimilable.

A culture which is, itself, dialogue and permanent appointment of "give and take" and that, beyond the traditional concepts of the different forms of artistic expression, can encompass tower levels and in all environments, most diverse manifestations of curiosity and creativity.

A culture that is not imposed and distributed, but proposed and participatory, that is not elite, but momentum and collective benefit and who can be an opportunity for a better understanding of ourselves together that factor and "soul" of our development.

This is done to preserve our African negro originality while leading a civilization model which, without being imitative and borrowing, know also reflect the realities of our century.

It should be located, in the most natural way possible, in a cultural current where Ivorian man-by come to his better balance and its most fertile harmonies.

The key is to keep ourselves in a world where multiply the opportunities of alienation and where it is easier dialogue with machines and figures with man and nature.

Our culture that wants, above all, value system and lifestyle, will be testifying for a universe to human dimensions.

In these times of ecological and social imbalances where injustice and global inequality are matched as the absurdity of the situations they generate, it is important that Ivorian society calls for development and technology, adapted the real needs of humanity as a whole and not to only too often artificial needs of minorities exceeded their growth.

The example we give ourselves, internal balances which we will achieve will be our best answer to this common and difficult quest for a new humanism for our time.

On this anniversary of our independence, it is this search for more effective balance I solemnly invite you, my dear compatriots, convinced that our past struggles for political independence and our present struggles for independence more real economic and an ever closer unity, you know, with me, with the government and alongside our glorious Democratic Party of Ivory Coast, write a new and very beautiful page, the page of a civilization original, made of social justice and fraternal solidarity, and also freedom, tolerance, dignity and peace.

Odienne Vive! Long live the Ivory Coast! "

