"My dear compatriots, very dear friends, as I would have liked, in the late evening of the year, then qu'entourés beings who are dear to you, you taste, in the quiet, peaceful family joys, invite you to rejoice with me to the end of the Indochina conflict dramatic! We could not ask for new happier and more in these times of relaxation that traditionally accompany the birth of the New Year.

We who have the chance to work and live in a land that war's misfortunes have always spared ill imagine the world of suffering, violence and hatred which sums up the daily life of a people torn. What this interminable bout of excruciating is the absurdity of intelligences, of ardor and virtue made, for nearly thirty years in the service of death; This is also the time, lost forever, for the happiness and innocence of generations who aspired only to live.

Hopefully, with all our strength, the recent difficulties that still stand at a rapid settlement of the conflict will be the last and that will enable parties involved to sit on sustainable and solid foundation, a long overdue peace !

Asia, which saw the beginning, during recent months, the approximation of Japanese and Chinese giants, extend contacts, there is little time, unthinkable between the two Koreas and formalize, at the top of the Indo-Pakistan reconciliation, too need peace not to know, finally, the outcome of the worst of his dramas.

The old Europe, meanwhile pursuing its difficult but irresistible march towards an increasingly structured set and wider, saluted, as appropriate, the outstanding companies of a man of courage and heart that exceeding a heavy resentment oldest conflict contributed, decisively, to establish between the two Germanies, along with certain powers of Eastern Europe, a comforting climate of more serene relationships.

OTHER HOMES VOLTAGE

There are other centers of power yesterday burning or still existing, familiar, in turn, very happy contagion tolerant realism and explicit or tentative signs yet of the new course of things; if the Middle East and Northern Ireland still suffer painful confrontations, Cuba and its powerful neighbor seem to gradually move towards the path of reason, while in the Arabian Peninsula, the Yemeni people regained its unit lost.

Meanwhile, open or will open new Soviet-American negotiations on nuclear arms control and, in Europe, the preliminary conference on security and cooperation and exploratory talks for mutual and balanced reduction of military forces in presence.

Who would not, in all these recent decisions, like so many happy omens ambition increasingly assertive generally to replace the current unbridled power will, most harmonious law of dialogue and peaceful confrontation?

While it is true that these events proceed motivation and concerns that we would like sometimes less forced, more or final and highest, it is obviously essential that they exist, above all, their profits, they are expected or acquired sufficient in themselves strongly enough that we wanted the point otherwise demanding.

As for Africa, naturally very sensitive to these swirls happy and long awaited and carefully to extend the spirit of the last Summit of Heads of State in Rabat, she has worked with happiness, in recent months, to bring, to burst or threatening conflicts, freely negotiated timely solutions. Difficulties occurred between Uganda and Tanzania, the more recent ones that saw oppose the Republic of Gabon and Equatorial Guinea are now only memories. Brothers countries have managed to actually find the sources of our tradition of wisdom and the most expensive offer in disinterested mediators and effective. With them is rendered; thanks also be made to the Presidents of the States concerned to have wanted as quickly, understand the fraternal aspect of these efforts and to end their misunderstandings.

Mail it is rare, alas, that table does not include some shadows. These shadows they were, in the end of this year, fewer than usual, however, are too significant for that in our joy, not mixed with other feelings.

FREEDOM IS ENTIRE

It is mainly the permanence and sometimes worsening of certain situations of injustice that concern us. It is intolerable that perpetuate oppressive regimes that have for deep justification, that the cruel law of the strongest and the desire of some people to prevent others from using their most legitimate rights to have themselves. It is outrageous that the security and prosperity of both can be purchased by the freedom and dignity of others, whether totalitarianism is multiple freedom, it is indivisible.

Let us hope that the actions of peace continues, Namibia and South Africa, in particular the UN Secretary General, are combined with insurance and the increasing weight of some liberation movements to prepare the Inevitable Dialogue that history awaits and, once again triumph over hatred and current opposition. also hope that international cooperation aligns more obvious and selflessly on the merits and on the basic choices of the Third World countries and do other shadows, more insidious, sometimes, but equally harmful to our improvement actions, fade gradually, making it more balanced, more effective and worthy, the rules necessary solidarity!

More convincing are, indeed, if these rules, finding the actual increase, th 1971 the overall assistance of the countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development to the Nations say underdeveloped, we don ' taught at the same time, a reduction of five percent, ten years from public assistance, if we did not have to wonder, moreover, the reluctance of some major consumers sign the recent Geneva agreement on cocoa and if a high official of the European aid had recently revealed that "donor countries annually spend ten times more in advertising spending that effective aid and disinterested Third World" and in 1969, "a total of thirteen and a half billion dollars transferred from rich countries to the Third World, about three billion actually represented a favor help sacrifice."

As long as the terms of certain aid aggravate the other, through their secondary effects, difficulties in assisted countries, as large multinational companies confuse their own strategy with the public interest as the real issues, which are redevelopment of the rules of economic and monetary game, stabilization of exchange, more rational organization of the market and insurance fair prices for producers will not be reviewed or would be imperfect, international cooperation may not always full play to the game that remains for us the essential: the mastery and ever greater autonomy of our actions for economic and social development.

A DITCH THAT HOLLOW

"In a world where coexist a privileged few and an overwhelming majority of poor and miserable, or the gap that separates them is widening instead of being bridged the choice between the political price of reform and political kegs of rebellion , inevitably imposes earlier. "

These words were not the spears from the tribune of a subversive organization, they were very normally made by the President McNamara, during the last General Assembly of the Group of the World Bank

"The adoption of specific measures to improve the condition of the poorest of countries where development view, actually over," the speaker continued, "not only principles but of social justice does caution only a moral imperative, it is also a political imperative. "

Who would approve coat foresight and depth of judgment on the first drama of our time?

We, for our part, firmly convinced of the correctness of these assertions, having constant concern, inside and outside our borders, formulas choices and promote action oriented resolutely towards the consolidation of a world of progress, justice and peace.

Unusually for the world, the year 1972 was also particularly rich in achievements and satisfactions of all kinds, for the Ivory Coast. The last weeks of the year have seen more precisely will result in our regions and in our capital city of many events that say, at once, the vitality of our economy, the diversity of our concerns and the great confidence to us made by our friends from abroad.

Driven by the desire to substitute solidarity worthy to cold selfishness and Peoples Dialogue with intransigence blocks, and testifying, on all fronts of peaceful dialogue, a tolerant and pragmatic Africa but also voluntary and sovereign, our policy foreign, often discreet but effective, multiplied its openings and its initiatives to promote a more just distribution of wealth in the world, unity and peace on our continent and of fraternal cooperation of men.

The circle of our friendships is still enlarged and we aspire in the future to extend to all States who are willing, beyond our differences and present the fundamentally different design that we sometimes have rules democracy and economy, go to us, accepting our choice, as we accept theirs.

Do not interfere in the affairs of others, understand before judging and able to play our own differences and our complementarities, to establish fruitful relationships on trust, on the friendly esteem and the best interest: as many 'evidence to the Ivorian political as we would like, in future, more widely shared.

But friendship is precious than our door would undoubtedly not as fruitful and as frank, if, within its borders, the Ivory Coast did not continue to provide face stability political, social harmony and national unity that has so happily made known. These twelve months have been marked in this regard, a special serenity, as if the consciousness of a unit prior to any action of real progress had become, for some, more acute.

That does not mean I will come back, that we have more problems and our vigilance has to relax, it just means, things are very related, that the quality of some recent consecrations might have been less marked in a different climate.

If recent weeks have seen a succession of many events and inaugurations, this is not a coincidence or too timely advertising is the logical conclusion of imminées efforts undertaken long, that had the ambition to shape and consolidate a young nation, in the image of its natural resources and qualities of his men. Challenges we were spears that invited us not to suffer but to overcome certain constraints and see far and wide to do.

We have met these challenges, particularly providing, with the dam Bandama and the new port Southwest answers to the size of our expectations.

Our pride is now very high: it is the legitimate pride aroused by strong works reflected sustainably and rigorously carried out.

Both in terms of Africa and solidarity between nations has that of our ongoing effort to consolidate the Ivorian nation, Koussou and San Pedro have become symbols.

These two achievements taking place in the glorious phalanx of the great facilities of the African continent which impose on the world the reality of Africa and enterprising technician.

In a universe in perpetual upheaval or weight if the requirements of economic and technological progress prevail, often excessively, on the other values ​​of societies and men. It is important that the works symbolize the ability of Africans to take charge and to master with the help of their most faithful friends, all data and all the demands of growth.

If Africa, through its many and distant traditions and natural conditions, has much to offer that it is called, the leisure civilization, and if his ancestral wisdom imported to the history of our time . It would be too easy and deeply unfair to reduce it to a special tank of international tourism and summarize in a welcoming and pleasant land of folklore and sun.

She also wants very naturally and otherwise adult, aware of its weaknesses, but also its dignity, its economic and human potential and the need to think and promote the best interests and welfare of its people, any growth of fullness and rigor. Images of African virtues Koussou and San Pedro have also become major assets of the balance and unity of the nation.

We are too aware of precisely the problems we have our regional development disparities and income inequalities which are in part the cause, not to strive tirelessly and voluntarily and concrete way, to limit the most worrying effects. We do not ignore that inner peace and political stability are properties at once valuable, beneficial and fragile and it is important to earn the daily assuring to all citizens of this country, a breakdown always more timely fruits of growth.

It was important that the Government of this country is not contented regularly express concerns about it, but he manifested his willingness to actually reduce these disparities. The need to state at the outset the leadership favors Abidjan and in traditional cultures rich regions do not facilitate certain choices, either, paradoxically, that the remarkable overall progress of our economy.

Decisions are, however, intervened, interesting, outside the Southwest, the Bandama Valley and the successful continuation of large agricultural diversification operations of the Lower Coast, most parts of our country.

The agro-industrial complex of the sugar Ferkessedougou region, programs rightly ambitious and remarkably implemented cotton and rice in the northern prefectures of the Central and West, new tourist settlements Southeast coast and the project to install a new complex of spinning-weaving in Agboville, which will, after the sets of Bouake and Dimbokro, to the Ivory Coast, one of major textile testify clearly, in this regard, our most recent intentions.

It should be well informed in May or very bad faith not to see in all these actions the consistent signs of a sustained political will and mistress of herself, to open sones hitherto marginal to the rhythm and requirements the overall growth of a modern economy, thus ensuring the jobs created and incomes, a more massive and more equitable distribution of the national product, causing undesirable changes in attitudes, production techniques and quality of life, rural, balancing, finally aves happiness, deep data of our development.

There are other actions, it is also clues and figures revealing as much as the overall vitality of our economy, our concern and concerted global approach to multiple problems it poses us and our will to make it less dependent on some external mechanisms and decision centers. In forestry and parallel to efforts to promote new species hitherto little or no demand, decisions intervened aiming, by the reorganization of the cuts, reforestation of the forest depleted species and acceleration and diversification of valuation methods, streamline operations, commercialization and industrialization of wood.

Maritime transport and road, the distribution and telecommunications were also the subject of studies and programs particularly revealing. The actions of the Ivorian Shippers' Council to make it less burdensome and more predictable fluctuations in freight rates, new road projects worth Southwest, West and North Central, the successes of the program commercial action and commissioning of the earth station telecommunication satellite of Akakro say enough, the extent and consistency of our outlook.

Figures, finally, are equally expressive: I will give examples for electricity consumption, increased from fifty-seven million to more than five hundred million kilowatt-hours of 1960 to 1972, an annual increase of more than 21% and most evocative data of an Ivorian industry that has seen its turnover multiply by twelve, payroll advance of one hundred twenty five percent in five years and the number of grow twenty workers four thousand in 1966, thirty nine thousand in 1971.

The domestic economic activity has recorded, in 1972, a very satisfactory progress and bec, despite the gloomy economic situation of international markets coffee and cocoa, for two years.

But the numbers, as comforting as they are, should not make us forget the essential, that is to say, man, Ivorian Man, primary purpose of all our efforts. That would, in fact, the son and daughters of this country, if the requirements and the fruits of our growth reduced to only the roles of producers and consumers?

What would become of our country if your freedom, your security, education and health of your children, your home and your entertainment, and everything we have just been used to call "quality of life" were relegated to second and unnecessary requirements satisfactions?

PROMOTING SOCIAL ACTION

The answer is easy and unacceptable consequences for a government worthy of the name and anxious to promote large-scale social actions that he order a philosophy of development, at the service of man. This year has seen, in this respect, assert and expand the educational TV experience, while the inauguration of the Institut Pasteur, new medical days in Abidjan and the measures taken for construction social housing and paid leave manifested in various sectors, the will of the state to alter beyond the economic health newsletters and deceptive ease of climates that can elicit certain official ceremonies.

For while it is important not to underestimate our successes, especially in the eyes of the ever faithful cohort of our usual critics. It is futile and dangerous to try to hide our weaknesses, whether cyclical or deep, and pay, without nuance, sometimes in autosatisfactions complacent qu'entretiennent overzealous friendships or too interested.

It has never been, nor in my awareness of the role of Head of State, nor in the design that I have my franchise relationship with you to be quiet, in the name of I know that they wrong reasons, the shortcomings of our development and the ills of our society, some of these weaknesses are also clear enough that hurt do not know.

Our financial situation in the first place, is still worrying, given the worsening deterioration of terms of trade, and we must, if we do not want to slow down or postpone the implementation of important projects selected by the Plan to remain very vigilant. Austerity must remain the rule.

Whatever the weight of certain habits in the recent past, it would not be worthy to prepare future generations for the future difficult our present weaknesses have not been able to prevent. The gradual hand by executives and the national capital, the various workings of our economy, remains the other hand, slow, despite the successes, especially in the insurance and banking sector.

Undoubtedly, the Ivorian nationals must it be gradual and significant along concerted and conscious of the interests of all our partners and we are aware that demagoguery harm unchecked would pose some hard-won balance. However, it should not be satisfied with too familiar excuses and undertake better and with increased vigor, the Ivorian nationals, which is a standard requirement of our people.

As for income inequality, whatever, we have seen the reality of our efforts and the strength of our warnings, they continue and get worse and the gap still wider, between actors and profiteers growth has become a constant concern of our social structures. The morality of certain elites in public life as in the business world is increasingly and rightly the subject of questions and criticism.

If there is enough in the nature of things to see prosperity result profiteering and the indispensable entrepreneurship does not always accompany the rarest of virtues, it is not in the traditions of our people to the law of profit and power of money, its first gods and soules obsessions.

I regret, in this respect, that multiply some regrettable behavior vis-à-vis the citizen or user defenseless; I deplore abusive friendships and too current regionalism misdeeds; I disapprove, in any form, explicit or felted, trafficking of influences and corruption; I am saddened, finally, difficulties faced by many to be agreed their words and actions.

BE WELL AND DIGNITY

Though the year ends are more traditionally devoted to happy confirmations as unpleasant revelations, I do not think my severity overtake you. It is, moreover, silences that dishonorable and facilities which are not abusing adults peoples.

Having always or concern for your well being and your dignity, I would not, as the years pass, leave our children a picture of a national community would have to rediscover for failing to respond in time, the essential purpose of a democracy of harmony and justice, I would not, after others, our Ivory Coast beloved sees grow the gap between the high ideals it upholds and the weight of the actual situations that are creating.

The flourishing of our society and its successful integration in the world today spend just as much by our ability to meet the demands of the late twentieth century that our loyalty to our traditions of wisdom and fraternal solidarity.

A society where the consumer would dominate the citizen, where money outweighed the heart, which would ruin the sects and clans Community requirements and where power would belong only to a few, is a doomed society. The only purpose of any policy is happiness, human happiness, the happiness of all men.

The work of progress, company since we sovereign charge of our destiny, could be carried out at the cost of your labor and your sacrifices.

Today, as is reaping the rewards of your courage, doubting how a country that was able to offer, in recent months, so many concrete achievements to your appreciation and that of our friends, growing numbers who have placed their esteem?

But how do not find that laughable signs as revealing an enterprising and proud nation be powerful one day questioned not the unconsciousness of a few?

You are, in these moments, dear friends, very naturally concerned about your plans and dreams for the future, but the future of societies and men is particularly happy that he also knows regain the mirror thing of the past .

I would like this evening, looking back on yourself, you you asked about what could have been, during the last months, your availability to tolerance, dialogue and the intelligence of the heart. I wish you were wondering what you have done and what you could do to make your contribution to the strengthening of ever more fraternal relations and serene among the citizens of this country.

I wish you all, son and daughters of the Ivorian land, become the workers of a future of light where the face shape is an Ivory Coast will matter in the world, as much by the success of its growth than its ability to testify in a cold hard world, demands a kind of community, justice, human warmth and deep peace.

Let this coming year be kind and gentle to the ones you cherish and for yourself and win, ever, in the world of suffering and injustice, happiness and the smile of all children! "

