"Ivorians Ivorians, Dear Friends,

In the late evening of the year where I know you particularly relaxed and happy to spend with your family and your friends, your attention and your joys, I would, first of all, you repeat, very simply, how the "Old "I'm happy is to feel surrounded, for so many years, your confidence and your very faithful affection and how these feelings are me and I remain essential.

I never intended and never conceive indeed responsibilities that you have agreed to give me the head of our dear Ivory Coast, without conviction. That by doing so, you first express your membership unanimous, spontaneous and profound political philosophy of our Party and our government and choices, actions and men who prolong and that drive.

Source meditations

That destiny, that is to say, my dear compatriots, have wanted for a time in our shared history, distinguish myself and confirm to the highest offices of the conduct of a people, has always been to me, a source of meditation and serious questions about the duties it entails, in a society like ours and in a century also disturbed that it is given us to live.

If people sometimes statesmen deserve the esteem of the people always merit and appropriate, in order not to fail, never forget that it is not sustainable consensus and effective communication between each other without exercise, to the sole benefit of the collective interest, the very high and very heavy requirements associated to power.

Order and Peace

The order, in particular, which are so often spoken, is it really and seriously threatened except by injustice, and peace Is not First, before the absence of violence and war, a just order?

If law and order, they are exercised within the boundaries of a State or in the field of international relations, are there to impose oppression, misery and addiction hopeless to against powerful politics or the economy, then they are hypocrisy and source of this "institutional violence" rightly denounced and which can not cause, in turn, other violence, d other hatreds and other chaos.

It has been said that some countries and some sub-continent were "objective situation of sin" as are dramatic and unsustainable realities that the apprenent and as it is true that sin reaches a social dimension when millions of people are prevented , by others, to become men, that is to say, autonomous beings, leaders and creators.

And yet, for a world that secret to himself, all intelligence, all the progress and all the means to reverse the course of these intolerable distortions, the years go by without really changing anything that we defeat, despair us and we revolt!

blind fatality

While world leaders still wonder, with the same tranquility and the same meticulousness on the number "reasonable and appropriate" for their ballistic rockets, missiles and other weapons of death, while science, imagination and silver can, today, allow the right to decency, dignity and peace still eludes too many brothers, as if it was normal that, worldwide by some sort of blind fate, peoples and minority forever deprived of hope.

I want tonight to the new year threshold that you take deeper consciousness yet, at the same time or the impossibility we are abstracting from us, selfishly the world around us and the tragedies that upset and luck of ours has always been to participate in a community that has achieved, whatever the difficulties, some precious balances that you know, too fragile.

I would like you to think about the urgent need to preserve this balance by contributing, each, to your level, your behavior and your actions to come, to make every day, stronger and more accepted by everyone, for lively an ever more fraternal Coast Ivory.

That the new year be happy and good for you, for your families and for all those who are dear to you and may God help us never forget what is essential to our existence as that of our beloved nation the freedom, justice, dignity and peace. "

