Ivorians Ivorians, My dear compatriots,

Tomorrow will turn to the Ivory Coast, for Africa and for the world, the first page of a new year, white page quickly enroll themselves and often shake up the happy and unhappy events of nations and men.

What will the coming months, in a world increasingly disconcerting and who can no longer combine the unpredictable, few observers, even among the most sophisticated and the most lucid, might be to imagine today . Too many contradictory tendencies clash, too shortsighted interest, expression of power and collective selfishness of wills without nuance, mingle and oppose, to make it possible to think of the future, peace and reason.

This is not pessimism, on this day, to say that a world that knows all too often set the destiny of the peoples in the fire braziers hardly reflects the great universal values ​​of morality, of the heart and mind and brings us more shame than pride serene.

La Barque A SOMBRE

"The boat sank humanity" very often in the history of mankind and not just in Auschwitz. It has sunk in recent months, Lebanon and Angola, she sank where she continues to sink elsewhere and whatever the form and severity of these shipwrecks, it is each time a little more desperate and futile to to see the effects, and to express regret.

We do not know what to say that has not already been too many times on the futility of war, the horror of blind fanaticism and necessities and essential benefits of tolerance and dialogue.

We do not know, before the unleashing of passions, interests quarry and the inexhaustible resources of international hypocrisy, what feelings or what new power balance should be refer to as breath a little nobility, respect for others and generosity on these desolate plains of human consciousness.

CITIZEN OF THE WORLD Should we then take refuge in the selfish comfort of prosperity havens and peace, silence his voice, closing his eyes to the world and say that all that is inhuman and everything else we now abroad?

Certainly not, and we fail in Ivory Coast itself and its vocation open and conciliatory nation, if the temptation came to him to fall back on itself.

We're not just Ivorians, but Africans and citizens of the world and we do not have the right and we will never have to escape our condition and the resulting responsibilities.

There is no question here of food, from our successes and our achievements, I know not what superiority complex that analysis of our shortcomings suffice, moreover, very quickly, and very just title to bring more accurate measurements.

We have, it is true, the chance to live in freedom and I think for most of us happy in a community wellness, peaceful and united many celebrate, which some denigrate, others finally, envy and sometimes jealous.

This chance we have, no doubt, for much-deserved hand, our labor, by the accuracy of our choices and the international confidence that, by extending the strengthens.

It does not give us any particular right to the sufficiency and vanity as to the scale of nations like that of humans, it is of modest quality, simplicity, weighting and why not, humor, worth the rarest virtues. Let us not forget and never divest of any lucidity availability to ourselves and friendly curiosity in the place of the world that surrounds us.

This, I believe, one of the most appropriate ways to strengthen that building a nation like ours, has, by its youth eminently fragile and vulnerable.

Do not think that we have become the single model, final and perfect for what to do in the area of ​​economic development, political unity and social harmony, remain attentive to the world by what he can bring us fertilizing and new opportunities to meditate and act, but also that we can also bring him to our modest place, that's what I think is important is what seems right to me.

LOYALTY AND TRUST

What seems more important, so that our future history is, first, made of happy events is that I can rely on, and that other, long after me, can count on your loyalty on your confidence and your work.

In order for the coming year is, again, a year of peace and shared joy, for our country and for all of you, it is essential that your continued shared commitment to practice the way the most unanimous and clearest. Without it and without national consensus, it might be a state but certainly not this communion of men and women that must be able to identify a nation to remain truly herself.

Redouble efforts in that difficult but exalting national construction. Reinforce each day by your actions concrete solidarity, intensify the fight against social inequalities, regional disparities. Serve always with faith and courage the cause of peace both within and outside our country.

I will try, as for me, by my actions every day to earn your trust and affection because I do not know that it is useless to appeal to others if we can not, so- Also, give an example.

Know, that evening of my life, the happiness of each of you and the greatness of our people remain my only passions and my life is beautiful, first of all that you give me.

Happy, happy, peaceful and sweet year to all of you, my brothers, my sisters, my friends forever!

