"Ivorians Ivorians, My dear compatiotes,

Here in 1976 will join the procession of dead years. Here in a few hours off, the last echoes of the festival, the sun rises on a new period of labor.

I wish that all who hear me today and who read me tomorrow, know that right now, as throughout the past months, my thought goes to them, I would like to be present in every home to tell each and everyone my deep affection and I would like them to retell for me to all those who have not had the inestimable privilege of learning to read or who have not been able to hear me.

Dear sisters and brothers, dear friends, thank you for all the affection you have shown me and which I greatly helped to overcome painful trials; I thank you for your trust, for your work, for the significant and important part you have taken in national construction and allow me abroad, to wear proudly and loudly by our qualified representatives flag our dear country and allow me without fear all my strength in the service of prosperity and happiness.

LOOKS CONFIDENT

Our national holiday gave me the opportunity to take stock of our achievements of some of our shortcomings and our expectations. She also gave me the opportunity to share my worries.

Tonight is encouraged by your looks confident ̶̶ filial should I say ̶ either by your attentive and fraternal listening, I would carry with you in a common reflection.

Despite excessive rainfall in the South, too rare in the center and north, our fertile land has faithfully responded to our efforts, as it will give us tomorrow for new victories. Let's make sure the great care and preserve it from irreparable damage which would suffer future generations. The most generous mother can not give more than it has and can go without danger of death beyond his strength.

Peasants, we owe you much, but you're not alone in the struggle that the nation has committed from birth to live and grow in prosperity. Thousands of workers in the cities and the bush sites, contribute to the common work the friendly competition of their brotherly hands.

As grows and diversifies our economy, new frameworks, new engineers, new workers and employees earn in serried ranks our peaceful army. All also deserve our respect, for the sanctity of work ennobles both the wearer burdens or driven heavy machinery than that in the hushed silence of laboratories' office gives to his task the best of his thought and his care .

While most of us will in a few moments to meet in cheerful groups that join our affection particularly those that their service remains at their posts in the central and in factories, in hospitals and maternity wards, the watchers our security and all too many, at our discretion, whether physical or moral suffering prevents rejoice.

Ivory Coast, in these

We will symbolically take for a new race

borrow laughing paths of hope. Let's hope so, with all our strength, that the world and, especially, see our continent away the specters of war and famine, that still dominated peoples can flourish in an independence not built on hatred but the legitimate recognition of their aspirations. Apartheid and racial discrimination in all its forms finally give way to the brotherhood of men that condemn justice and reason.

We will make every effort for our part to preserve the chances of dialogue and make peace a living reality for large recognize the eminent dignity of the poor and build with them a new order.

The problems I just mentioned involve such forces that Ivory Coast can not obviously control alone. It does not deprive yet, you can be certain to make its voice heard alongside those who share its ideals.

Moreover, while strongly present in the world, we have full responsibility for our national destiny. Let more than ever in practice our motto: "Union-Discipline-Work" do permanently silence the petty rivalries, selfish appetites generate only sterility and resentment. Gather all our efforts in the service of the country and, with God's help, we will know a happy new year.

To each of us, my friends, my sisters and brothers, to all those who have the chance to live at home and those who are temporarily away, I wish courage and confidence, success, than in cities, villages and families animated by the same faith harmony reign and fruitful work.

I will not stop, as for me, to devote myself with all my soul to the service of the greatness and prosperity of our beloved country.

Hosted by the consciousness of belonging to both our continent and the world, I will continue to share in our name, our unshakable faith in the need for peace, tolerance, solidarity, the love and brotherhood. On your behalf, I am committed to these ideals triumph.

So help me, are taking together, proud, determined and serene, the new year the doors.

Long live the Ivory Coast! "

