"Ivorians Ivorians, Dear compatriots.

Here the sun has just set on the last day of the year and I have once again the profound joy of this traditional event and family that allows me to reiterate my great affection and wishing you my vows most fraternal.

Dream of a peaceful world

During this short time, it is allowed to dream of a peaceful world where all would be banished discord factors, where only the work, intelligence and virtue have right of citizenship, where diseases would be overcome and where the only competitions are those of culture and constructive science. While longing as 1978 born way we enter the world of light, I know and you know like me that wishes come miraculously realize that in fairy tales and that evil geniuses use it more often to pervert the consequences.

So in ourselves and in the experience of past years, and 1977 has not been stingy, we need to find the substance of new efforts and new progress. If we can embrace with a glance, like a satellite map of Africa, we would see all backgrounds, oppression, war and hunger threaten people when they do not already decimated. We would then fully aware of how lucky we have been able, by the union and by work, not to compromise the assets that providence had bestowed our country but, on the contrary derive maximum benefits.

For ourselves and for others

Continue down this path, for ourselves and for others. For ourselves, because our sacred duty is to prosper Ivorian homeland and ensure the future for others, because I believe in the virtue of the example and we need to bring in a massive way and our selfless help our unfortunate brethren.

What is true and good for the nation is, of course, in family units that compose it. It is necessary that we stop thinking that just make an order to improve service through a reform, abolish abuse. Let everyone observes, make an examination of conscience and wondered what he did during the year in his modest sphere and what remains to be done and that is huge for our society to be harmonious and sweet the humble, serene and clean. It is the effort of everyone who made the effort of all. If peace harmony love of work well done, honesty, reign in families, it is step by step throughout the national fabric that will be renovated and purifies.

This is the special wish that I make for the new year with all my heart that you address, health, success and happiness deserved. At all Ivorians to all Ivorians, all those and all those, whatever their origin, that contribute to harmonious construction of our country, to our foreign guests, Happy New Year 1978! "

