I test the biggest regret in not being personally present at the opening of your way I measure its importance. But I want to show you my support and that is why I have asked the President to come Auguste DENISE represent me among you and read you this message.

The Ivory Coast is honored as the capital, Abidjan, was chosen for the Symposium of the Union of African Railways on you theme "Railway Development and Cooperation in Africa"

Our country follows indeed a constant interest whatever tends to promote cooperation among African states. He always sought to contribute to the level of its resources, to strengthen the actions. He ties in the sense of equal importance with which promotes the strengthening of political solidarity and what is the scope of the increased technical capacity of States, which contribute to exchanges like those that you will pursue in common.

Professional meetings create personal connections that sustainably consolidate the joint reflections on ways to accelerate development in the area where they have responsibilities. The convergence of actions they pursue weaves bonds of solidarity which are the frame of effective cooperation where contact with the realities eliminates the often harmful passionate reactions at other levels.

What a beautiful theme cooperation surplus as communications, without which it can not exist Ivory Coast is proud in that capacity for hosting fruitful inter-African meetings on the roads air transport and maritime transport. The importance of roads ter is no less as appears daily on our continent that the very existence of certain States is seriously disrupted when the operation of their rail network is compromised by a lack or insufficient cooperation political or technical. This is a lesson that reminds us how much we are already united and that should encourage us to become ever more.

A key element

The railway has been somewhat neglected until recently in favor of the road has often been confined to the role of auxiliary of the major mining companies. The development of our states, by increasing the induced traffic that must reemphasize its undeniable advantages, in terms of capacity, safety and regularity. Although modernization efforts will be normally needed. They will allow the railway to find the place due to him as an agent of economic progress.

For us Ivorians, the railway business is both an essential part of our heritage and an irreplaceable instrument of interstate cooperation, since the network we have is common to us with a neighboring nation and plays a role some in strengthening our economic solidarity and our traditional emotional ties.

I hope with this perspective that your meeting will enable an increasing number of African leaders to strengthen their belief in the importance of a less fragmented rail network and the need to grant it financial sacrifices, but heavy cost, that its implementation entails.

We welcome with sympathy for revival of strong interest for the little railway by funding agencies and hope it continues and strengthens.

I am confident that the Symposium ABIDJAN a positive contribution to the study of these important issues and thereby strengthen inter-African solidarity I wish all participants that their Ivorian stay to be pleasant and fruitful.

