As the threshold of each new year, the President of the Republic addressed the nation a message in which he appealed for peace and brotherhood among men.

On the other hand, the Head of State also sated yesterday the wishes of all the constituted bodies of the state and those of diplomats accredited to the Ivory Coast.

The solemn ceremony of presentation of these wishes to President Houphouet-Boigny was held at the Presidential Palace of the Republic.

In the center of the wishes expressed by the one and the other was also in peace, that peace which he wishes the rise during the Mass said Sunday the Church of Our Lady of Treichville.

"My dear compatriots, dear friends.

On the eve of January 1, when the past year will go into the mist of memory and the atmosphere festive leads us to a moment forget your worries and leave the past emerge as moments of happiness, the when, as the proud new school notebooks he received in September is not considering them to be a covered enjoyed tasks and erasures, we find ourselves in front of blank pages which is included in the three hundred and sixty five days to come, our destiny is from the heart that I address you my most affectionate greetings and more fraternal that 1979 be for you, for your families, for all the Ivory Coast a happy New Year. The formula may appear worn, but the rollers are also resistant to the test of time and throw their brightness under the sun. There is no need of a desired vocabulary to wish peace hearts success in the efforts, health and prosperity for all, the happy harmony between the dynamism of both the wisdom of others.

Give a hand

The week we have just experienced was ideal for family and social gatherings, the closer ties that everyday modern life tends sometimes to relax. I ask you to take advantage of those moments when the sout easier encounters the lighter atmosphere to erase some resentment you may have, reach out to those that fit of temper or jealousy could away from you. I also asked not to lock yourself in the intimate happiness that is hopefully yours, but think of the lonely person, the orphan, the poor, the infirm, who are, perhaps , neighbors and feeling more has ordinary sadness of their condition. What words came a friendship gesture of the heart do participate in the common joy.

Have, as a thought for all peoples declined, for anyone that war or persecution have driven from their land and for whom the word party is now meaningless.

Friends of the Ivory Coast.

You who work with us in this country, which is also yours, and contribute in each sector to its development, I would care to forget you and thanking you for your fruitful activity, I formula was your intention and that of your families my most friendly greetings.

The child's year

The year 1979 must be the International Year of the Child. Join us all in fervent prayer for these children who suffer so many conflicts which they are the innocent victims of deprivations they carry lifetime stigma, fly finally open an era of peace.

Pooling all our efforts in Côte d'Ivoire in Africa, all over the earth men, rise spiritual harvest and hardware that will, each in abundance foods whose hearts and bodies are starving.

Let each of us trying to be better, work better, to live daily in the dedication to homeland. So assured the new year bring us happiness and satisfaction of our consequences.

Happy New Year ! "

