My fellow Americans.

We are at the end of a busy year of events, to mention that the visit of His Holiness Pope John Paul II, holding the 7th Congress and the general elections showed that the Ivory Coast was alive , honored in its international relations and capable of Interior to follow an original and realistic way that owes nothing to anyone.

We are today a family and that's why I did mention that to deplore the events which disturb the world political and economic battles, crises in crisis, causing so much pain and misery.

I, unfortunately, have other opportunities to return more thoroughly.

So let us, for once, a little selfish el welcome us peace that is ours: savor it intensely during these few days of celebration but by telling us that if our people had merited by his wisdom and maturity, it is not an irreversible and must be preserved by our union, our behavior against evil influences that may arise and sacrifices that the situation could still cause us to have to make.

RESPECT OF PUBLIC GOOD

Therefore, I renew, insistently, my call for a thorough reform of attitudes both towards the state and communities and between individuals.

Respect for public property, which is not the preferred share of some or the inexhaustible source where everyone would satisfy his appetites, mutual respect which prohibits the morgue, spreading the wealth and led instead to see each of whatever condition he may be, the image of his own brother.

1981: THE YEAR OF THE DISABLED

The United Nations decided that 1981 will be devoted to the disabled.

If physical disabilities deserve our fraternal concern, do not forget that there are other disabled people in social life, those circumstances have prevented them from getting a good start in life, lack of resources to undertake studies or a minimum of material security to prosecute under suitable conditions, all those who have had to sacrifice family for raising orphans or help elderly parents, not to mention our foreign brothers on political or economic constraints forced to leave their homeland and who we bring in the moral and material conditions sometimes precarious and difficult, the competition of their brains and arms.

The privileged, who have the chance to live in prosperity and ignore the uncertainty of tomorrow, must not forget them and help them cope with their hard condition not only materially by paying them adequately, if employees but morally refraining from any attitude of superiority or contempt, by providing them the contrary the comfort of human relations, warm and friendly.

This is the main desire I have for our country continues its march in harmony cers the 21st century.

Its implementation does not depend on the goodwill of Providence: it is in our hands.

I'm not saying that all else shall be added unto us, too weak external contingencies currently make the vision we can have of the future.

At least we shall have the certainty and better withstand the jolts of the situation and make the most of our efforts.

With a special thought for all those national and non-national, which could not fully participate in these festivals to ensure the operation of services, our health, our safety or representation of our interests abroad, I address you, my dear compatriots, dear friends, my fervent wish that 1981 brings you all the humanly desirable satisfactions that peace reigns in the hearts and our dear country continues in order and prosperity his serene march to the future.

Happy new year.

