As in the beginning of each year the President Felix Houphouet-Boigny addressed the nation in a message that emphasizes the need to strengthen national unity to continue the momentum of national construction that despite , born the difficulties of the international economic situation, still-promising.

The strengthening of regional arrangements, requires awareness more algae complementarity between developing nations and industrialized nations were also bishops by the President of the Republic who ended on a hopeful note, saying that " after our difficulties passing through the work already realized and to which we will undertake, thanks also to the wealth which providence has endowed our soil and subsoil, the crisis will only be a bad memory who has had at least the advantage of teaching us that nothing is ever acquired and that the euphoria is a dangerous intoxication "

My fellow Americans.

We have just experienced a difficult year.

Although favored over others, Ivory Coast has not been spared by the economic crisis.

The harsh laws of the international market have significantly reduced our resources; the state, like every citizen, had proportionately restrict his lifestyle, try to limit spending to the essentials, which was not without hard constraints for businesses, shops, families and all this in an international climate still troubled and fraught with anxiety.

The famine continued its ravages: racism and intolerance have continued to cause the oppression of entire populations and weapons to continue their bloody dialogue punctuated with acts of extreme violence, including terrorism too innocent are the victims including men whose vocation is to preach love and peace among men.

POSITIVE ELEMENTS

However, by sending you my best wishes for the new year, I do not sacrifice to a control ritual.

I believe, indeed, that the positive elements are not lacking to hope for a better future.

In Côte d'Ivoire, despite the sacrifices imposed by the circumstances, capital works, social welfare, the establishment of modern agriculture, the adaptation of education to economic realities, the country will restore the muscles ease tended to atrophy.

In Africa, more and more numerous and dynamic, are those who understand that regional and subregional agreements are the best ways that enable our policies and our economies to deploy to the best of our potential.

In the world finally, voices becoming louder and listened call for a genuine dialogue, denounce injustice: it takes more and more aware that the prosperity of the leading countries, the dynamism of their economies can not perpetuate if developing countries do not have access to turn to a standard of living at a purchasing power such as to enable them both to play their role of commodity producers, buyers and sellers of goods on the world market and stop being destabilization and conflict homes, customers find everything for unrealistic ideologies and arms dealers.

LINE OF CONDUCT

For Ivory Coast, which still preserves with its independence, freedom, defend loud and clear whenever he had the cause of peace and justice, it goes without saying that the line is all mapped out for the coming months.

We do not waver in our commitment or our friendships, we will not stop denouncing without hatred but without failure vices of a system that tends to perpetuate poverty and war.

It would be pointless, however, to fight for this new world order to which we aspire if we were not able to reap the benefits when the situation has changed in the sense that we hope.

MY WISH THE MOST ARDENT

Therefore, my most ardent wish is that 1982 definitely see disappear all that can undermine our unity, all the bitterness and pettiness, ethnic and social prejudices that still plague the lives of too many villages and neighborhoods that hinder the development of cooperatives, compromise the rational development of our soil, make the bed favoritism.

The only possible discrimination is that merit, hard work, competence.

Redouble our efforts in training managers capable of transforming one day our raw materials into finished or semi-finished, only effective defense against the deterioration of terms of trade so harmful to our development.

Growing team spirit is solidarity, confidence in one another and healthy creative emulation.

The spirit of competition is healthy and invigorating must always be tempered by charity and solidarity without which it becomes aggression and defiance of the weak.

Condemn parochialism that ignores that in a nation we can not do everything at once and everywhere at once.

May these words a bit harsh do not you doubt for a moment the immense love I you door of my total understanding for your difficulties, my unfailing hope in the future of our country.

HAPPY NEW YEAR 82

After the night and secret fears she is radiant dawn.

After our temporary difficulties, thanks to the work already realized and to which we will undertake, thanks also to the wealth which Providence has endowed our soil and subsoil, the crisis will only be a bad memory who has had at least the advantage of teaching us that nothing is ever acquired and that the euphoria is a dangerous intoxication.

Dear brothers and sisters Ivorians, friends of Côte d'Ivoire, to anyone who will taste the joys of the holiday, to all who obscurely, will sacrifice these hours our protection and our comfort, I wish a good and happy New year 1982 in peace, prosperity and unity of hearts.

