In Africa, in the field of transport and communications and particularly in the shipping whose development lags worryingly behind, no effort can not and should appear excessive.

The Economic Committee of the United Nations for Africa has embraced this truth held to date, four donor conferences including that of Abidjan, real round table that provides participants with the countries of the sub -region and potential donor agencies and countries an invaluable opportunity to exchange views on actual funding opportunities for maritime projects and port.

These projects, selected as part of the Decade of Transport and Communications in Africa relate to all shipping activities in West and Central Africa.

In doing so, the ECA highlights the need, increasingly felt, to mobilize all available resources and to have one custom smarter in any search for a harmonious and therefore shipping and activities related.

By the choice of Abidjan headquarters of the ministerial conference of the States of West and Central Africa on maritime transport and maritime crossroads with regional and international vocation is becoming ever it proves, if necessary, that this objective can be achieved in an exemplary cooperation framework and increase African countries among themselves and with the industrialized countries.

I take this opportunity to warmly thank and congratulate ECA and its Executive Secretary. Adebayo Adedeji, for this welcome initiative.

Let me also salute Mr. Julien Kamaya, Secretary of State to the Prime Minister for Merchant Gabon, President of the Ministerial Conference on Maritime Transport.

Having had the privilege to convene and host in Abidjan, the first ministerial conference I can measure all the way since 1975, the year of birth of a maritime policy that has our way of sub-region and ways to be heard the industrialized world and an effective instrument of regional cooperation: the Ministerial conference of West African States and the maritime transportation center.

This institution has become, a few years after its creation a reality.

Just to be convinced to evoke penny ribs role of ECA and IMCO as co-organizers of this conference of donors.

Maritime cooperation the ministerial conference thus aims to build between member States of the subregion is how original, reassuring and promising.

I also want to pay tribute to the international organizations and the United Nations system with particular reference to the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization, a specialized agency of the United Nations, thanks to the skill and dedication of its Secretary General, Mr. Srivastava, generously contributes to the efficiency of maritime transport and to promote, in the interest of the international community, the security of international maritime navigation and one against marine pollution.

I welcome with pleasure the presence at this conference the representative of Mr. Edem Kodjo, Secretary General of the Organization of African Unity, the N'Gom Moussa, Secretary General of the Economic Community of Africa West and Mr. Adama Diagne, General Secretary of the Union of African Railways whose personal involvement adds luster to your meeting.

It is also close to my heart to make the tribute they deserve all those donor countries political, financial experts international staff technicians and experts, who made the trip from Europe, America and Asia to search with us means a maritime policy, through the conduct of studies consistent and effective implementation of priority projects at national or sub-regional level, should, among other major objectives:

examining the possibilities and interest to ensure linkages between ports in the sub-region to promote the development of intra-regional trade; country's port transit facilities from granting landlocked and organization arrangements for the landlocked countries; harmonization of administrative, legislative and customs and enforcement of relevant maritime conventions; training preferably within African regional institutions such our maritime academies Accra and Abidjan, port personnel, sailors and settled according to the highest international standards; modernizing our ports, increasing their effectiveness and their processing capacity and the acquisition of modern equipment suited to multimodal transport and containerization techniques and pallet unitization unit load barges and transroutage trailers.

In our relations with our partners in the industrialized countries, the actual implementation of these major objectives will contribute to the promotion, consolidation and increased trade between North and South, as it is undeniable that there are profound interdependencies structure and level of trade on the one hand, the level of development of market of other fleets.

PROMISE AND ENCOURAGEMENT

However, new trends are emerging in the organization of maritime transport, which have the effect, the accentuation of horizontal concentration in specialized trades and the affirmation of the trend towards consolidation of market linkages financial industrialized countries and shipping activity.

In this perspective, only international cooperation based on full awareness of the interdependence of the world economies, the importance of the financial effort and human investment in surveying implement can accelerate in our sub-region endogenous development of marine technology and a rational and efficient organization of maritime transport.

This is why, for us African countries that are working with patience and will to an awareness of the inescapably attached to the defense character of our national interests and to promote sustainable regional economic entities, the presence in numbers this roundtable Abidjan of many participants developed countries is reassuring.

We feel, in fact, this event as a promise and encouragement to persevere in the stubborn pursuit of consultation and dialogue as a means of privileged establishment of a new international maritime order based on justice, fairness, pragmatism and the necessary interdependence of North and South men.

Because, you understand, honorable tomorrow is to ask if several groups of nations can have them become sufficiently integral vision to build together a more just and more human.

I express hope that the results of your work contribute to reinvent our common future and our silence this Brazilian proverb: "When or dream alone is only a dream - when we dream together is the beginning of reality. "

I base the hope that the seriousness and realism will be marked this work is a testament to their success and, for all these reasons, it is with a renewed faith in the future solidarity of all countries and all men in friendship, peace and fruitful labor and brotherhood I declare open the technical advisory Abidjan meeting with donors maritime and port projects.

