"It is my duty (...) to emphasize once again the urgent need not to bend your back passively to adversity in the hope that the cocoon derisory privileges for some, of archaic routine for others resist indefinitely the realities of an unforgiving world "

"My dear compatriots,

Rereading the greeting message that I asked of you they are ten years old, I was torn between two conflicting feelings: on one hand the bitter sweet satisfaction of having nothing hidden, at the time of the difficulties we waiting and adjustments we would have to make in our behavior but on the other hand, the regret that my repeated warnings made by my appeals for solidarity and unity were often lost in the desert or the museum quotes, brief that everything was almost as if everyone was waiting for the next effort of understanding and renewal he was careful indifference or cowardice to impose oneself.

It is my duty, however, to stress again the urgent need not to bend your back passively to adversity in the hope that derisory privileges cocoon for some, of archaic routine for others to resist indefinitely realities of an unforgiving world.

A very serious error would also imagine, I speak for those who clearly feel confused or even the need for a renewal, that political or administrative decisions with more or less binding provisions would be sufficient to eliminate all that remains questionable in our society.

UNEMPLOYMENT AND RECESSION

Certainly, we undertook, as he had to do, the reorganization measures and qu'imposaient economy for years too easy where the mistakes were fading in the general euphoria.

But the discipline has become the great majority of Ivorians, their reasoned submission to the hard constraints in the economy that I highly appreciate would be insufficient if they kept a passive character and even if they would lead to a paralyzing inertia.

A football team only confined to his backcourt could win a championship: we must attack ensuring certainly our defense but mostly by scoring goals in productivity, quality work, and obviously collectively lead this party as we have committed to prosperity and progress against unemployment and recession.

The forces cancel when they diverge; carried on in the same direction, they add.

That is why I must stress again the concepts of unity and solidarity that are too easily lost sight of.

RENOVATE OUR PARTY

I do not want to demonstrate that the tensions that have emerged during the elections, legislative, municipal and even when it came secretaries general of the PDCI-RDA, highlighting in some regrettable absence of meaning civic, inordinate appetite supposed material advantages of access to these charges.

We had to spend a time for reconciliation and forces that could have be used elsewhere.

Successively, the seminar on territorial administration held in April in Yamoussoukro, the creation of the National Assembly in May of two committees of reconciliation and research, study and information mission of thirty-two delegations of the Political Bureau carried out in August in the same spirit, had among its objectives of bringing minds to reason, and to raise awareness of the real priorities.

I believe now to think that these efforts were not in vain.

I had, indeed, the satisfaction to enjoy the high quality of work done to renovate our party and restore the vitality of its origins by studying the actions of the Executive Committee members in the training seminar and Information Secretaries general who have been exemplary clarity and realism.

The path is clear for the PDCI-RDA, the backbone of our country now plays a full role in national life by providing the explanation and transmission tasks hers.

Convincing and not force, learn to listen better heard, are the true capacity of a truly democratic country so that people fully involved in the development of his intelligence and his heart.

THE JOY OF LIVING

This is also true for the modest achievements at village level as for large projects often confusing for the applicants who ignore their purpose and basically see the disadvantages that they must suffer in the short term.

We will have in 1983 an austerity and rigor budget, however, does nothing to sacrifice essential in priority sectors.

It will be better supported if we are well aware that this recovery will restore the breath and muscles of our political, administrative and economic solidarity so that must inhabit our hearts softened the effects of the worst affected by the social categories crisis.

Thus armed with patience and courage, we can wait for better times.

Perhaps are they closer than we think, if the reflections of the entire international community interested in the outcome of the crisis lead to close cooperation between peoples taking into account the immense human potential and material of our world that could provide all the joy of living in peace and security.

To all of you, dear brothers and sisters Ivorians, all those who represent our country outside our borders or who conscientiously studying there to bring us to return capital to their knowledge, to our friends who work with us and trust as to our fate, I wish a merry Christmas and 1983, fruitful, happy and fraternal. "

