The Head of State addressed as usual his traditional message to the nation. This year, the address of President Felix Houphouet-Boigny is characterized by its brevity. This does not detract from the great range of content.

The President of the Republic noted that "hard times we are experiencing and which we impose sacrifices that we know able puts us aware of the precariousness of material pleasures."

The Head of State form for the "fervent wishes Ivorians to our dear country continues in the union to set the example of a nation that assumes its independence in friendship with other peoples, bravely overcomes his disability and prepare with confidence and determination to future generations. "

"Dear brothers and sisters Ivorians. Dear friends of Côte d'Ivoire.

More than ever our end of year celebrations should be those of renewal and hope, and help us transcend our everyday concerns to better receive the love and peace message that comes to us from centuries back and under various forms all the great religions of the world, in their sacred books and texts in the comments who followed them constantly proclaim.

The hard times we are experiencing and which we impose sacrifices that we are known places able to become aware of the precariousness of material pleasures.

It highlights the contrary virtues that will cross the lesser evil: work, discipline, unity and solidarity.

I wish it asserts itself especially during these festivals where everyone in its means taste the joys of family and friendship.

It is good to think of those who suffer from the disease and misery.

Our thoughts are with them tonight and especially to those who provide services hotlines in even more difficult conditions than in previous years and our Ivorian brothers who work for us outside our borders.

SIT THE BASICS OF RENEWAL

I can not forget our foreign friends who live in Ivory Coast, many of whom will be away from their during these festivals that are specifically those family gatherings.

They share our concerns and are working with us to alleviate them.

1983 was a year of reordering.

The year 1984, which will be difficult, very difficult, should allow us, if each of us accepts his part in the discipline of sacrifice, to lay the foundations of renewal we are building and which, with the help God will give the necessary impetus to the expansion of our economy.

I wish each of you health, happiness, hearts, peace, courage to undertake and persevere.

I wish our farmers abundant and beneficial rains also bring a solution to our energy problems.

I also hope that the crisis that shakes the world make clear to all the severity of the laws of nature that gives us life but can also drought, earthquakes, floods, constantly questioning the fruits of the hard labor of men and so they understand that peace and the renunciation of solutions

strength she assumes are the only way to ensure the future of humanity opened up by the work of researchers who would master the most diseases, to ensure a dignified life, access to knowledge and to remove the fear of hunger.

Finally, I express fervent wishes for our dear country in the union continues to set the example of a nation that assumes its independence in friendship with other peoples, bravely overcomes his disability and prepare with confidence and determination the future generations.

Happy, happy and fruitful 1984 ".

