"Dear brothers and sisters Ivorians, Dear friends of Côte d'Ivoire

Some popular tales imagine an unhappy is offered by a benevolent genius carrying only three wishes.

The first two are wasted on trivialities; the third will actually serves to fix somehow the consequences of bad choices and unfortunate precedents can be found in the same deplorable condition than before.

The moral of these fables inspired by what is called "the wisdom of nations" is tough but clear.

It means you need to know seizing opportunities, not to obey the whims of his immediate desires and ultimately it is not acquired by labor and preserved by serious conduct risk of disappearing in the smoke disillusionment .

I have not the power to satisfy your wishes magically I also know the key because they reflect the concerns of all that I share the same heart.

We would like to present a more smiling with increased resources for households, improving the employment situation, good harvest, peace and internal and external security, and a peaceful and prosperous future for our children and for ourselves same.

CONTROLLING HAZARDS OF CLIMATE

The man is not yet able to master the vagaries of the climate which depend partly our crops and we are not able to intervene with our limited resources in an international situation which raises concerns more powerful.

But if God hears our prayers and savings irreparable disasters, together we can make the future meets our wishes.

We just have to continue our efforts to development of our resources and better management and honest with hard work and increased professionalism, in unity and social peace in the continuing effort to make our country always more beautiful, stronger, more listening, always preferring to speech acts.

WORKING INTEREST AND fruitful

Dear friends, it is that each of you address my most fraternal wishes that 1985 brings you all the joy and success you deserve in your families, in your towns, in your work; and since the year will be placed by the United Nations as the Year of Youth, it is to her that I will address any particular desire of a fertile year in school and academic success for those who study and those who enter the workforce, an interesting and fruitful work, not to mention the athletes who gave us nice big satisfactions to continue to set an example of effort and a healthy lifestyle.

To all Ivorians and foreigners friends, Ivory Coast and beyond our borders, peace hearts, healthy body, for our dear country, as 1985 is a warm and happy year.

Long live the Ivory Coast!

The Head of State as usual, we recommend to persevere in the effort: the only way to develop our potential. These efforts to development of our resources must be accompanied by a better and honest management, "with hard work and increased professionalism, in unity and social peace in the continuing effort to make our country always more beautiful, stronger, more listening, always preferring to speech acts. "

In all, the President of the Republic wished "peace hearts, healthy body ...".

Monday evening, the Head of State attended Notre Dame de Treichville surrounded by the political authorities of our country, the "Mass for Peace" that celebrated Cardinal Bernard Yago. The Archbishop of Abidjan has also made an important homily acknowledging that the government's efforts in favor of youth, he however said that the youth should be for the national community a concern because our youth through a serious crisis.

