"It is with satisfaction that we welcome the resolutions you just presented.

Our development policy is based on two poles. The first pole is the peasantry which we all come.

Despite the crisis, the decline in purchasing power, the peasantry continued to produce more both in terms of quantity and quality.

We will soon hold a congress to take stock of the twenty-five years of independence. On this occasion, details will be made in the country.

Many children in the country does not make sufficient account of the efforts made by our brothers and fathers peasants.

As for cocoa production, she stood at our beginnings to 80,000 tons. Today it is 500,000 tons. 60,000 tonnes of coffee - despite the exceptional drought which has reduced production, we will go back this year to 270,000 tons.

We started with 60,000 tons of cotton; This year estimates provide 200,000 tons. We all know that this country has never experienced famine.

While it is true that the quality may suffer - because of the small amount of protein and meat - in the Ivory Coast, at least everyone eats food from the region twice daily.

When we evaluate all these efforts of the peasants keep calm essential to our development: peace, we can not not take every opportunity to elicit (...).

The second pole is made by you, the public and private sector workers. You knew you-also make many sacrifices.

You said that in Ivory Coast, it has not diminished the wing. You pay the regular salaries. Why did we do this in spite of the crisis?

It is through the strength of two divisions: the peasants on one side. On the other, the public and private sector workers, whose representatives have always held us responsible, an official language.

You can not on this occasion of May 1 did not ask what you have presented today in your claims.

This is a minimum because you have given our realities.

They are sad but not discouraging. We had two great calamities. The crisis began with the sudden drop in raw materials. We went up to 1.500 billion CFA revenue from coffee and cocoa bank.

Cocoa costing 2,000 CFA per kilo and coffee had reached 3,000 CFA.

So much so it was said that the cate threatened oil. Suddenly, these two commodities have experienced this decline to the point that we found the day after 1.500 billion to 500 billion.

When talking now about the rising price of cocoa and coffee, not compared to what we touched before the crisis. Rather compared to what we touch since the crisis. The coffee was 550 CFA. While cocoa was down below 500 francs. It now goes back to 1000 CFA per kilo for cocoa, and 1,200 CFA for coffee.

Regarding the purchasing power yesterday we took to develop the country. It is better to see developing countries than remain stationary while the world is changing.

We borrowed 200 F to 530 F. reimburse us this dropped to 476 F. This is far today 200 F that we were loaned. With interests not just of the 200 F but about 530 F.

It is said that our country is engaged in debt rescheduling policy. And we believe that it is a great service that we made. Of course, many countries have not been so lucky (if you can call it "luck"). We have for example 300.000 billion. With the rise of the dollar, it asks us to pay 600.000 billion. We have not incurred debt 600,000 billion but we have to pay 600.000 billion. And what they gave us as rescheduling? 200.000 billion repayable within a period of eight years. Every year, we lose 400 billion on 600.000 billion that we demanded. And our revenue, in the best case, will rise this year to 800 billion. We will have to spend 400 billion to pay debts.

When some 400 billion goes to farmers - sublime abnegation - they perceive as 260 billion. There we will stay that 150 billion we agree industries to meet our needs. We must not stop us. Instead, we must continue (...)

We draw your attention to these guidelines that we develop in Congress to be known among urban workers, fields and the government, there is only one problem: the problem of power and not the " want to "

What a joy for us to pay as appropriate the work of our farmers, our private sector officials. We have always been to meet our needs. Solar we set far beyond the wages of other countries, this is not a result of the claims. It is ourselves that taking into account the needs of the population, improvement of living standards, quality of life, have proposed the salaries of most students that African country.

It is we ourselves who have attributed higher scholarships to our children, won the general status of the civil service pay our teachers because we considered that the function of teaching was not sufficiently appreciated by our children ( ...)

It is we ourselves who have asked all workers (and we thank you) to help our unemployed by granting 1% of their salary for the benefit of their brothers. Would what to keep in homes until the sun rises on recovery nationwide.

We will therefore examine the claims you have made. You had words which must be employed between us wish not require. Wish is a very noble word. Because the desirable always happens in the life of the possible. (...)

We wish for our part, there is an improvement and increase in the price of our products during the year.

What we are sure is the increase in the quantity of our products. The farmers continue to produce more. Unfortunately, the price does not depend on us. We will fight as we can. We will continue to fight. Pourqu'on recognize at least the effort of our farmers. For that they get fair compensation for their productions. God will certainly help. And it will be with joy, with a smile, we will review your resolutions.

You can count on our good will. It is at the limit of the opportunities that the country provides us with you to continue with the national construction this goodwill will never fail us. It is with the greatest understanding, the greatest kindness that we will study your resolutions.

What can be done. What is not will not be only after an explanation that we will give to your desktop. That's what we were waiting for the correction of this sad situation that we live since the crisis. Unfortunately, we expect a "new life." So far, the little we have achieved, we are proud of. Despite the crisis - which we reached full force - the little that we did - we keep repeating - we got it without a kilogram of gold, copper, iron, bauxite, manganese ...

We believe that in 1985 or 1986 at the latest, we will have this "new life" with the oil Jacqueville. We are forced to wait, God knows why.

We expect our interlocutors since 15 April. Perhaps they will be there today or tomorrow ... We are eager to know when it will release oil from seabeds Jacqueville to answer some of your concerns that we share. Because these are the concerns of every home. And you can not exclude us because we are all workers in this country. "

