Holy Father,

the words are weak to express the joy that we welcome you to and gratitude for agreeing to add Abidjan step to a heavy travel schedule to dedicate this Cathedral you asked, five years ago, the first Pierre.

This signal favor that we dare hardly hope illuminates our hearts and animates the burning desire to conform our thoughts and actions to the messages you keep throwing all men of all faiths for the dignity of the human person, for respect for life, for the defense of human rights and peace, "this magnificent gift of God" without which these values ​​are violated, trampled in the storm of violence.

Germinate and produce grain peace, love, justice, freedom ...

It is up to leaders of the world to translate into concrete action your messages of peace, love, freedom, justice, tolerance and solidarity for the greater good of all mankind.

For our small part in the Ivory Coast, we strive to germinate and produce these grains peace, love, justice, freedom, tolerance, solidarity, that you keep sowing around the world .

Indeed, the Ivorians want to make peace, their second religion.

We have no political prisoners.

We did not perform, we will never execute death row inmates.

At caught mercy.

On the occasion of the National Day, on December 7, twenty-cinquièrne anniversary of our independence and remember, Holy Father, your second trip to Ivory Coast will deliver us most of the prisoners.

In Ivory Coast, all disputes that may arise between citizens will be peacefully resolved through the dialogue to the exclusion of all use of force.

Worldwide, we wish to see the dialogue prevail in all cases.

SOLIDARITY AT HOME, NOT A WORD VAIN

Despite difficult economic conditions, workers in the public and private sectors agree hundredth of their salary to help their brothers affected by unemployment, or young people out of universities waiting for a job.

Thanks to social peace prevailing in the country, farmers produced more and better in all agricultural sectors.

THE TRUTH MUST BE OF RULE

Peace needs truth have you called, Holy Father, in your Message of 1 January 1980.

Because we believe that the truth must be the rule in the elations between rulers and ruled, we have never concealed our mistakes, our weaknesses, temptations to avoid voluntary sacrifices to be made in the interest of the country.

We firmly believe that we will emerge from this crisis so serious spares no nation, peace, unity, solidarity and fraternity.

Holy Father, I do not want to take more of your precious time and delay the moment when the Ivorian people testify its joy and where you can discover the yes sanctuary stands as a collective prayer to heaven.

On behalf of my fellow citizens and my own behalf, I wish you very Holy Father, you in renewing our filial gratitude for the invaluable support that you provide us the warmest welcome, the most respectful and affectionate.

INTERTITRES ARE THE EDITORS

