"Mr. Secretary General, Honorable worker representatives, is for me, every year an opportunity to speak with you about your problems, our problems - because we are all workers.

We know very much that you have taken since the accession of our country to independence in nation building: first by your work and especially your understanding of the real needs of the country.

Instead of a fighting union - you have given your example that the African world must remember - we have before us in the Ivory Coast by participating union. What to say? Whether you are aware of the responsibilities of all in this exciting task of nation building.

Errors - because we are men - can occur, we must repair the once one has recognized them.

But the good faith is the basis of our common action for a better future of our country.

You just presented eight resolutions. We will examine them with the greatest possible understanding; you deserve it.

We are limited here in our work for our workers as the problem of means.

You we're talking about around 52,000 of Public Works workers, construction "when the building goes - it's like coffee in Brazil - everything goes." Alas, we are being hit hard by the crisis, and the crisis unfortunately reached the most sensitive points.

We said that we are not the low point, but we are not yet at the shore. There is a recovery, it is slow, but continuous. We start with the roads. You know that we have begun the construction of two roads sectors: asphalting of all roads to some profitability, and the construction of rural roads, village that enable our farmers to settle in the heart of the savannah, heart of the forest to produce in the best interest of the entire population.

Should we list them? You know yourselves asphalting of the Sinfra-Gagnoa road Sinfra-Issia, was completed; that of Daloa, Issia, Daloa-Vavoua will be continued between Daloa-Ségueta. The Man-Danane road should also be pursued through Guiglo reach Toulé-pleu.

Not to mention the road Niablé that fat cocoa production center that has been neglected so far and we're asphalt.

ROAD: A NECESSITY

So we started by the same source of production: this is the road that will allow our farmers to settle.

And I recalled just now the German representative who came to visit us, this is the road that allows our farmers I tell you to move to create plantations and it is the same road that allows the evacuation of agricultural products and freight necessary to farmers.

We started timidly, because you have to start the construction of hospitals, Yopougon and Treichville soon Abobo-Gare. Yesterday was the total immobility with the crisis that hit us full force; today is the weak recovery, certainly. Because when a patient has suffered long, immobilized in bed and that his doctor just say, "you better go, the temperature dropped, the voltage is better," the person who is in bed for months if not years, n 'appreciate its improvement as the day it will resume its activities: walking.

But nevertheless, here we are dealing with intelligent men. And yourself, you have taught me a long speech; (...) because thanks me everywhere ...

But then I say that's life, you will continue to ask us and we realize that even though we have achieved something - and with you - what remains to be done is much larger than we have done already.

So we need the climate of peace that allowed us to move forward is strengthened every day. The bottom line is that we understand. The bottom line is that one considers the children of one family, and that sacrifices be distributed fairly to avoid any discomfort.

You apply for unemployment insurance, we should establish it during the good times. But better late than never. We will study it. There are precedents.

As for the participation of the employer - when you talk about the employer you do not limit yourself to the private sector, there is also the state which is employer, or you do not say - I understand - when you ask for 2% of participation, it is not only the private sector, there is also the state. So there is a select committee that will quickly address this issue with its members, the Minister of Labor and representatives of the working class, to learn about what has been done elsewhere.

There is no question for us to slavishly copy what has been done elsewhere, but to adapt to our realities.

We can say that this will become a reality from next year:

"Unemployment insurance".

IN THE FIRST LINE

You spoke of our women. We want for them equal rights and duties. And women lawyers from across Francophone Africa will soon meet. You just remember how little we have done, I mean the entry of women into the body of the Police; but it is a step that will be followed by others:

Women in the political struggle are brought to the forefront; they must be able to benefit from the achievements of our common struggle. They were at the forefront, it should not be that in the quiet, they are too far back (...)

For everything else, a committee will take up all your grievances. The ministers will examine them, but you will also participate in the review so that workers know that in this country, participation is not one-sided. It should if you were involved either in all areas of decision-making; workers must also bring their views to that, given our resources, we can serve the interests of all without sacrificing some over others.

Regarding the salary question, my brothers I have said that everything is a matter of resources. We started the year and our budget is funded by revenues from our exports, that is to say in particular, coffee and cocoa; we started with 2,000 F subway kilo of cocoa, and 2.600 F coffee kilo.

Many said they had found the old price. This is not true. In 1979, F 2000, it was the CFA F 3,000 also.

But as the crisis has hit us suddenly, that this price was down for cocoa at 500 CFA in 2000, there are already raising prices; and we thought it was going to immediately increase the share that goes to the farmers - it is to them that we must all for now - and also raise the salaries of civil servants. Unfortunately, today, at a time when I will speak cocoa prices dropped to 1,300 francs instead of 2,000, or 650 francs a kilo. Will it be released?

I continue to fight with the blessing of all the workers, peasants and workers.

We do not know discouragement, we fight ..

But see if cocoa stays at 12 or 13, we pay farmers already 400 francs per kilogram, irrespective of transport, there is no possibility of repayment; we may disburse the limited cash reserves to allow the export of our cocoa. I am not pessimistic. I think the speculators will come to understand and give us reason. They are in the process of killing the goose that lays golden eggs. If the cocoa does not pay, the future generations will not remain on the plantations with the hoe and the machete.

One can speculate, but that exists. If tomorrow the production decline, there will be speculators. I do not blackmail; we can not do in 80 years, we must tell the truth and I tell them the truth. I think they will reflect on the alarm call of the Ivory Coast.

At present, all African producers are discouraged; Ghana, 550,000 tons, 200,000 tons falls. For a long time it was believed that cocoa from Ghana passed through the border, or the entire border is guarded.

Nigeria, with its production of 285,000 tons was the second largest producer, the production fell to 120,000 tons today. (...) It is discouragement which seizes all workers.

At present, the Ivory Coast alone produces as much as Ghana, Nigeria and Cameroon together. But this growth of our production does not offset the huge loss accused by the countries I just mentioned.

And when these speculators talk overproduction, it is only to abuse our youth in independent living. But we will keep.

LA MORALE, MAUVAISE CONSEILLERE

And I think that little by little our brothers understand the need to get along. This is not a strategic product. This is true, but they need the cocoa they do not pass cocoa and the price of the chocolate bar also has not fallen, nor the price of a cup of coffee has decreased. This is speculation. I believe that given the unfortunate results that are being recorded in Africa, poverty is a bad counselor, must include Europeans, while there is still time.

Misery will not serve peace in Africa, let alone in the world.

I'm not saying this to discourage you.

If the price rises, continues, we will fulfill our duty as pleasant, that of seeing the smile of our workers, civil servants and private.

We smile as we are happy and I do not want that date of 1 May, feast day of work, but also, as we said, you sang like me, this is the month beautiful.

Well, I would not disappoint you in that day, saying that the pessimism overtakes me.

Share my optimism and I believe we will find a way to satisfy as far as possible to all your claims.

