"I wish that the new year is actually placed under the sign of true solidarity." This is one of the wishes expressed by the Head of State in his traditional message to the year end.

Dear brothers and sisters Ivorian, Dear friends of Côte d'Ivoire

1987 appears to us as the new blank page in the history of independent Ivory Coast we write together for over a quarter century.

It is offered to us for us to marquions positive action, clear, crisp and clean.

It is in peace, harmony and the work we will continue our work, that God's help will always make more fruitful if we see the virtues of charity and justice to help the afflicted to endure their condition and justify success those that fate has favored when they know share the benefits with more unhappy.

I hope that the new year is actually placed under the sign of true solidarity.

That our joy will not make us forget those of our brothers who have disappeared this year.

My loving thoughts come both in day old who have made our country the young early snatched from life and especially victims of duty which they have sacrificed.

Helping their families to bear the immense sadness that overwhelms.

Looking toward the future and friendship with all peoples of the earth, I express the hope that the mirror of the universal consciousness finally reflects the beautiful face of the peace as the desired image is still blurred or distorted by the tumult of servile passions.

This peace that we can impose, ensure in worship with us and take advantage of the truce days to forgive those who have offended us and think to give it that our own behavior may have unpleasant for others to guilty with regard to our duties as citizens, neighbors, relatives.

To all of you, dear brothers, dear friends, I wish all the ardent love I you door, the health, prosperity and happiness.

That 1987 be a year of joy, unity and concord.

Dear brothers and sisters, present or distant from the Ivory Coast, remain in his service in the pride of participating with all our strength to its happy destiny.

Happy New Year!

