I am proud to be at the head of the Ivory Coast, driving men like you, nourishing the ambition, with confidence in each other '

Mr. Secretary General, dear friends, it is I who will congratulate you for your courage and above all for your understanding of the realities that we live.

The price of cocoa in 1932 that I denounced, is purchasing power, exactly the same as we win today.

But the answer you on the fabric you wear beautifully: "Discouragement is not Ivorian."

BANDER OUR HEARTS AND WORK

We no longer have the right to whine. We must bend our hearts and work consistently together.

And so I congratulate you for your understanding is that the workers, admirable, have created in this development is social peace, the peace of hearts and minds. It is confidence in one another.

You trust us, is a valuable asset that you in me, and I have valouser the benefit of workers, onc the benefit of all the Ivory Coast.

We are all workers. What to do ? There is no other answer: work, train young people, our brothers, our son, s grandchildren son.

As long as we have not been able to transform some or all of which are our immense agricultural, mining, well, we the law of the strongest, the law of demand and the law of the title.

I repeat, there is market law between two countries of equal development, but when the partner - and it does unfortunately for us-alone currently sets the price of our raw materials, and goods made mostly from raw materials insufficiently paid when the other partner makes you pay dearly for the service we unfortunately still necessary, there is no market law.

I say and I repeat, (this is an example), the Japanese were, like us, everything is relative. Japan began as a less developed country than the current so-called developed countries.

But his son worked. They had no raw materials (agricultural, energy, mineral), but Japan were men. Men who were aware of their late, and wanted to catch up, achieve equality with others.

You must therefore work must train our men.

Thanks to you, we have the necessary patience, but patience to prepare an active response to the challenge of underdevelopment.

SHOULD WE FORMIONS OUR CHILDREN

Last year at this time, I told you we went out of the trough of the wave, and we finally perceive the coast, but we still had to row together with force to reach the coast (...) ; suddenly occurs the catastrophic drop the price of coffee, cocoa, cotton, palm oil, all that was to procure the means to train our cadres.

But the real answer is: we must train our children.

Yesterday we were colonized, and we have not participated in the Industrial Revolution. It is now outdated.

We live in the age of IT, science, technology.

We must cultivate in our children, our ambition - not pride - of one day to equality with others.

Today you have me ease the task. For your sacrifice when you decided here in Ivory Coast, place your struggle in the participation and work in the collective effort to address our country.

I am very proud to be at the head of a country like this, driving men like you, nourishing the ambition, with confidence in one another.

With the help of God, based on solidarity, effective, the will to achieve shared prosperity with the help of God, I say, we will meet the challenge "

