"I continues to repeat that there is no need to despair": this message, the Head of State has dealt with force and conviction in January. It remains relevant as the axiom that "discouragement is not Ivorian."

By AUGUSTUS MIREMONT

Why indeed despair? Why fall prey to bitterness di discouragement when our people have realized the benefits of unity, solidarity and peace? It is true that the crisis hits. Harshly. It is also true that we feel at the job, in these few companies closing, at the great works of the State, even if they take as we note with satisfaction, have not regained their erstwhile boom. But it is just as true and real as if the Ivorian nation can suffer irreparable damage without harm to the economy is that it is based on a national feeling increasingly strong, a total confidence in her First Magistrate, on pragmatism recognized both in its development policy in its external relations. Pragmatism that is found in the choice of effective participation in running the state that proudly proclaim the General Workers Union of Côte d'Ivoire (UGTCI) and its trade components. Pragmatism explains the deep consensus built from which social peace, to determine the general line of economic development. No need for violence. No use of diatribe, Molotov cocktails. Dialogue, Dialogue always mingled leaders and populations, contractors and employees, preserve our "legacy of wisdom and sound values ​​of tradition" "Archbishop Antonio Matiazzo), safeguard the rule of man, rid the Ivorian model development of its harmful slag.

The man should not and can not in fact be sacrificed to hardware. It can not be considered only as a cog in the economic utility. It must be the permanent good policy objective.

It is also necessary that this man gives himself the trouble and willingness to sit down and respect the values ​​of truth, justice, honesty, freedom. That would be full political wonderful promises if the artisan or the beneficiary of this policy should divert it from its purpose to enslave its own needs?

Let's think about it in these days of commemoration of duties collected by the worker. Social peace is at stake.

