"For reasons I will develop just now, I would like to speak today, contrary to custom, the laws to my compatriots and friends of the Ivory Coast.

My dear compatriots, Dear friends of Côte d'Ivoire

I am pleased with you again after two weeks of absence. As you know, at the end of the, France-Africa Conference, I went immediately to France, for two main reasons:

the first: kissing my sister MAMI Fetai, who is based in the French capital in recent months.

The excellent state of health it enjoys now, gives me and still gives me immense joy. It is for me a motive of great moral support in the difficult times we are going through some and others.

the second reason: to extend my talks on issues of concern which we are hard-faced:

* Air Afrique and the prices of our raw materials, especially, the price of cocoa from Ivory Coast.

Just arrived in Paris, I have taken steps. Unfortunately, I had reckoned without the flu raging currently in Paris, and that I was not spared.

Doctors have prescribed me; bed rest Some friends went further, asking me to postpone my return home, to my complete recovery.

But, you know yourselves, dear compatriots, it was hard to follow this advice because as I will assume the responsibilities you know, to; head of our country, it is unthinkable that I spend the first day of the New Year outside the Ivory Coast, even in a friendly country like France. So I answered the call of the country and here I am with you.

I simply ask you to suffer me to postpone my Message year-end and the presentation of Vows ceremony Constituted Corps.

But before returning to the main problems that concern us (Air Afrique, and Cocoa Award), I would ask you to allow me to stop, if only for a few moments on the France-Africa Conference held from 14 to 16 December in Casablanca. Everything has been said and well said about the perfect success of this meeting.

How could it be otherwise, with this wonderful setting of great African city, so beautiful, so well developed, which offered us the ideal place reflections and especially bilateral talks the most rewarding? How could it be otherwise, with that warm, fraternal, typically African that His Majesty King Hassan II, his Government and his valiant and generous people have given to all delegations? I would add, perhaps, a special note: all the France-Africa conferences in which I was able to participate, it is undoubtedly the 15th Conference held in Casablanca who has best succeeded. The quality of interventions - and I apologize for not being able to mention here all those of my colleagues who have spoken both in camera and in the plenary - the quality of interventions, I say, enriched the debates. I shall mention only three of them: those of the outgoing President, President François Mitterrand who, once again, pleaded with all his heart and all his talent, the cause of small, the disinherited, for a better price their products, their raw materials in general, and an understanding of developed countries in helping to provide developing countries. Mr.

ACHIEVING AGREEMENT TO CONCORDE

The second operation, highly anticipated, you know, it is that our new president, His Majesty Hassan II, in a very chastened style - you know how much is grown the King of Morocco - has recommended its peers, the absolute need to reach agreement, concord, solidarity, prior to any happy and harmonious development.

It is then our colleague and brother Marshal Mobutu SESE SEKO who has learned with great happiness in his closing speech, the teachings of our discussions both so rich and dense.

Ivory Coast wants through me, here add any special note. How could we forget indeed any unique features, multiple, pleasant including His Majesty King Hassan II, his Government and his people surrounded our delegation and myself. How could I translate these exquisite kindness, worthy of a great king, His Majesty Hassan II has continued to provide me throughout my stay in Casablanca? How can I thank, as you did, the members of the Political Bureau legitimate expression of our party, on behalf of the people of Côte d'Ivoire, expressing to His Majesty warmly, the gratitude of the Ivorian people ? This noble gesture that have been the King Hassan II and the City Council of Casablanca giving my name to one of the most prestigious avenues of the city, which goes from the port to the famous "Place MOHAMED V"! You translated what I feel and that I can not, alas, speak otherwise than by expression of the heart. What we have seen and felt without country eloquently underlines that Morocco deserves the assessments so rightly about it, namely a country that knows how to cultivate excellent tradition and modernity. Morocco is one of the few countries that does not know the food addiction. He managed to achieve, and largely self-sufficient food; a country that knows not only cultivate the land but above all friendship, hospitality, democracy. I propose myself, without my special guest, to go again on 10 July in Casablanca to attend the inauguration of the Grand Mosque - the largest in the world after Medina - and at the same time with one stone two birds taking part in ceremonies scheduled for the 60th Anniversary of His Majesty Hassan II.

I have acted there with my heart of Africa, because this great king continues in our meetings to say not only spiritual and temporal leader of his country, but also a great African.

That said, let's get the two essential questions which you expect the development, the future of our beloved "Air-Africa", and the price of our cocoa.

My friends, as you know, trusted me at our meeting in Niamey, given my capacity as dean, asking me to research ways that will consolidate the management of our joint airline.

RESOLVING THIS SERIOUS PROBLEM

I spoke to France and she agreed to help. She appointed for the effect of its top executives. Yves ROLLAND-Billecard whose term as Director-General of the Caisse Centrale, has just been renewed for renter to help us solve this serious problem of mismanagement of our common Mr. Billecard Company has prepared a large file he handed me. I conveyed this matter to each of my peers, Air Afrique partners for their consideration, and the sooner the better. I do not want to prejudge what they will decide, but what I know is that we will meet soon to Yamoussoukro, to make decisions.

Time is short, debts accumulate, we must get out of this situation. We must safeguard our organization ideal instrument of active solidarity between ten African francophone countries. I trust my friends. The ball is in our court. France wants to help us on both financial and technical, but we must deserve help. We need to really know what we want and what we want is the simple return to the status of Yaounde creating our airline which is regarded worldwide as one of the best for organizations multinationals in the operation of the Air Force. I trust them, we will soon find ourselves in Yamoussoukro and I believe that a final decision will be taken by all of us together in friendship and trust.

There remains the problem of the price of our raw materials, including our cocoa. Much has been written sui this vital issue for us, but the modest Doctor I am concerned that those who have studied the fate of our core product, cocoa, did not begin with an accurate diagnosis and clear before suggest remedies. What to say? Since the accession of our country to independence, if we have progressed if we realized what is considered the "Ivorian miracle", it is only through the work of our farmers. I keep repeating that we hear him well, but there are no more deaf as those who will not hear, or we need to hear: We've never sold a liter of oil, a kilo of iron, copper, manganese, uranium or bauxite. It is our farmers who have accepted the hardest sacrifices to allow Côte d'Ivoire to reach the degree of evolution that everyone envies.

What is it about ?

Recently, we asked or reduce kilo of cocoa agreed purchase price to our farmers; I said no ! and I say again a thousand times no! For I know the sacrifices of our peasant brothers. Do not have a short memory. We owe everything to our farmers.

Ivory Coast was the "youngest" of the French colonies. In terms of production and schooling were the last `has independence in 1960, it is too often forgotten.

We had only 8% of school when others had already reached 26 to 36%.

For cocoa of which we speak today, we were only the 4th largest producer with 80,000 T. Ghana, and Nigeria, between them, provided ten times the Ivorian production. We did not discouraged and our farmers have trusted us. We continued to work to achieve the positive results you know.

The World Bank itself had asked us to increase the share returning to farmers. We did not follow the World Bank in its recommendations. What have we done ? We supported the production. What to say? We have encouraged all of our brothers that created a hectare of cocoa giving them 30,000 CFA as incentive pay. With the stability of our country enjoys peace and that results very quickly, we went up the coast and we became, as you know, the world's top cocoa producer. This is not triumphalism, but what I want is that we can clearly grasp and that we understand us well: our peasant brothers have agreed to make 4/5 of their production, thus their income, Ivorian state to allow it to ensure the harmonious development of the country. It is these sacrifices that we were able to meet our commitments, honor our debt; thanks to these recipes we could fuel our development budget and maintain the pace of our growth has been admired by the whole world.

And now, suddenly, without which nothing justifies, if not excessive appetite of speculators. Since 1986, we are suffering an unacceptable reduction unfortunately true of 600 billion CFA francs of our revenue from our agricultural production. We are already the third year of this situation when, despite the crisis, thanks to the sacrifices of peasants, we were able to reschedule our debts and pay 1400 billion FCFA in three years No country in the world has achieved a such performance. And suddenly, I say without that nothing justifies this fall.

The cocoa industry, you know, is chocolate, cocoa powder to the cosmetics and pharmaceuticals; none of these sectors has experienced decreasing prices. On the contrary, thanks to cocoa, those who make use of chocolate milk, sugar, almonds including hazelnuts. But none of these levels there was every little price reduction. The second sector is cocoa powder for consumption developed countries use milk that is produced in abundance at home and would be discharged, at least in part, if the cocoa powder does not allow consumption breakfast. I'll spare you the details for cosmetics and pharmaceutical products, such as cocoa suppositories ...

But why the drop in prices of our cocoa? This drop is due to what is called the law of the Exchange, a stock that does not impose on the products of developed countries. Americans do not need this exchange, the Europeans not to fix the price of their wheat, for example. Only South Americans and we who are the victims.

Since the accession of our country to independence, we suffer the whims of the stock market. I do not want to develop this further, because next Tuesday, January 3, 1989, we will hold a meeting at the Political Bureau, extended to Members of the Government.

I will then communicate the results of my investigation. Our fight is not easy, because for the first time, we encounter in the defense of fair remuneration of labor of our farmers to big interests. But we are still animated by faith.

When we began this struggle, we were very small. But we have not changed since the other not, have not changed in their desire to exploit our farmers. Remember: It was in 1932, Cocoa Abengourou had experienced a purchase price therefore purchasing power as ridiculous as today. And the little doctor that I had raised against this injustice and advised refusal to sell this cocoa. The Governor Bourgil that we understood and supported was sacked by the powerful settlers of the time. The Governor REST came replace him.

We had some pretty hard from interviews, but we eventually agreed. He then asked me to let it sell cocoa that was stored in poor conditions promising for next year, to give more decent price for our products cocoa and coffee. He kept his promise, and it's thanks to him that we developed coffee culture in Indénié and Ivory Coast Colonial.

"Enrich yourselves," he said, not by writing to the marabouts and witch doctors today, but working.

It is through this work that the cultivation of cocoa and coffee has been developed.

Today, alas, specialists insatiable speculation and exploitation back surface. We wonder what? "Kill the goose that lays golden eggs." And I say no!

Cocoa production declined everywhere except in Ivory Coast and Brazil. We must continue to produce, and to fight to ensure farmers a decent price for their produce. I do not want to go too far, as I have said we have an appointment Tuesday, January 3 to 10 hours.

REDUCE THE SPECULATORS APPETITES

What I can say to you is that citizens of developed countries do not accept all this unworthy behavior of their brothers, and some came to our shores to support us, and with them we will, if not controlled, but at least reduce the insatiable appetites of speculators, so that Ivory Coast can at least enjoy the fruit of his work and pursue its vital growth until our children tomorrow, fall, thanks to their strong technical and scientific underdevelopment of the challenge, transforming all or any of our products locally.

We need to know persevere. You know, even if some Africans, after communion or pilgrimage to Mecca, returning to see the witch doctor, we all remain believers in Africa. We all believe in God. And we know that whenever we defend, selflessly the cause of small, God is there to help us. And God help us. But we must begin, ourselves, help us by persevering in the effort.

It's not you, who have letters that I recall the motto of the House of Orange: "It is not necessary to hope to undertake, nor succeed in order to persevere."

And the little tom-tom of my family does not he say: "persevere in all that we undertake"?

Should I add the recommendation to Edgar Quinet, who said: "Nothing escapes the working consistency. The falling water, drip, pierce the hardest rock. "

Despite the desire of speculators to prevent us from moving forward in us denying fair pay our production efforts, we must therefore, with Edgar Quinet, always persevere ...

My dear compatriots,

I told you that I must postpone my post year end. But as we are on the eve of the first day of the New Year, I would like, by way of the media, to inform the Ivorian people, to all my brothers and sisters, and to all the friends of Cote d Ivory, the burning my wish for the Year 1989 track realized their most cherished aspirations: Happiness in peace and justice!

So I say to one and all: Happy New Year 1989! "

