In the week before the presidential election Demière, the Ivorian government daily Fraternite Matin daily publishes a small strip comic: it shows a relentless bawling opposition candidate before a skeptical crowd I also want to taste the power !. In his zeal, the designer does not realize that by a mirror effect, it depicts both the wishes of the opposition leaders that fears: power is a property that is acquired, preserved, but not sharing.

As we approach the end of a campaign that has already killed eight people, on the eve of an election, that whatever its progress and its result will be marked by the boycott of the opposition, it is probably the to look for blocking the democratization process committed five years ago, the evening reigned supreme Felix Houphou-and-Boigny.

ON BALLOT stuffed FES

Professor Rene Degni- Segui, dean of the law school, which just attempt a mission of good offices between the government and the opposition says: On the three criteria that define a democracy: pluralism, the rule of law and alternation, none is really respects Approval level-d'ivoire. Applying the methods of one-party to a multiparty system, the system can not function. But the Ivorian political actors are struggling to get rid of old habits.

A fifties, a militant of the Rally of Republicans (RDR), a split from the Democratic Party of Ivory Coast (PDCI, former single party) created to support the presidential aspirations of former Prime Minister Alassane Ouattara, remembers: When I came back from France at the end of my studies, I was made to hold a poll. I thought you had to take into account what people did in the joumee, even if there was only one candidate. In reality, at the end of the joumee we ourselves émargeait same lists, we stuffed the ballot boxes and the Minutes were sent without counting the ballots.

Today, at the headquarters of the PDCI in the chic Cocody district, the armed police who monitor the building which is normal in the aftermath of the fire at the headquarters of the party Yopougon, a popular suburb are stationed in the inside the court has rather the outside, as if they were part of the security service.

Democratization in 1990, with its presidential election, which saw confront Laurent Gbagbo and Felix Houphou-and-Boigny and legislative elections that propelled the National Assembly has a handful of deputies of the Ivorian Popular Front (FPI), first opponents was entering the premises, does not mark the end of this era, but the beginning of a long transition which we still do not see the end.

The transition Ivorian was unwound in another ritual elsewhere in Africa. There were no national conference or interim government or constitutional referendum. Everything has been designed within the framework of institutions essentially put in place by Mr. Houphouet-Boigny independence, generally institutions imitated those of France, on which the one-party system was grafted.

These are the metastatic this transplant that today poisons politics. Alassane Ouattara is now a virtual leaders he never adhered to a political opposition party. But it was the last Prime Minister Mr. Houphouet-Boigny, appointed in November 1990 after thirty years of undivided sway of the President, and proved to be a fierce opponent of the opposition, making imprison Laurent Gbagbo, the leader of the FPI, which today is his combines, thanks to an anti-breakers law he had to pass. On the death of the father of the Ivory Coast, Ouattara tried to succeed him, imposing vigorously enough reading to say the least questionable constitutional texts.

CODE ELECTORAL

Today the lawful way of the conquest of power is barred to him by an electoral code which contains provisions designed personally: are Eligible Ivorians by birth, residents in Ivory Coast, born of father and mother them- same Ivorian birth. Ouattara, who is from the north, near the border with Burkina Faso, Burkinabe father is, say its opponents.

It defends in, and says that it is rather the residence clause which can not meet because of his appointment as Deputy Director of the International Monetary Fund that prevents him to present himself. The President Konan Bedie said he himself even Ouattara informed that this residence clause does not apply to him and puts a new challenge to prove his Ivoirite.

The quarrel might seem ridiculous if she had revealed and exacerbated the divisions between ethnic or religious communities. The temptation to put the opponent out of the game by denying that nationality it exists on both sides. The opposition accuses Mr. Bedie to be of Ghanaian descent. Extremists PDCI prey on large tunics, northerners, and opposition demonstrators are persuaded that the police are hitting the Togolese sent to the rescue of Mr. Bedie by the General Eyadema, the ogre of the region.

The parties of the Republican Front are convinced that the electoral census was made according to political inclinations of communities, clear that it was easier to get a voter card if one is Baule, the ethnic presidents to date, that beast, as Mr. Gbagbo.

This logic of exclusion, if carried to its term, will make Mr. Bedie a president who will be in front of him that opponents excluded from political life. And these will be tents denier him legitimacy. The rule of law could no resist, which remains very fragile, as testified by the recent demise of the President of the Federation of Ivorian students, Guillaume Soro Kigbafoury whose relatives say he was kidnapped by the Ivorian DST .

But the Ivory Coast, though it still lacks pluralist political experience unlike Benin and Senegal has strengths. The parties, if they are all based on an ethnic basis, recruit well beyond these limits. There is no tradition of political violence, and low numbers of police ban to the army to intervene actively in the life of the country. The presidential election will take place Sunday in a climate of extreme tension. If violence that will result from this voltage exceeds a certain threshold, the son of the dialogue can be started again by the legislative elections, to be held in stride, and gains accumulated in five years permanently challenged.

