We must face the facts. The Ivorian army came out of its barracks and strictly Republican role she watched since the country's independence in 1960. enlisted men and noncommissioned officers dissatisfied with their living conditions humiliated at not having been cited Henri Konan Bedie in his address to the nation Wednesday, December 22 furious at not having received their entire premium participation in a UN peacekeeping operation in the Central African Republic took to the streets of Abidjan on Thursday.

It took the radio broadcast of General Robert Guei a former Chief of Staff became Minister for the general confusion looming Friday morning eviction Henri Konan Bedie who presided over the destinies of the Ivory Coast since the death of his predecessor Felix Houphouet-Boignyle father of the Ivorian nation died December 7, 1993.

Bedie President of the National Assembly second character of the state was then the constitutional successor of Felix Houphouet-Boigny. Appointed by the texts he had thus become the second president of the I Côte even after a skirmish with discreet Alassane Ouattarale only prime minister ever appointed by the Elder during his reign. He inherited a country in keeping with the times with a free press and an honorable record on human rights of the individual and political freedoms. Completing fire mandate Felix Houphouet-Boignyil had presented himself to the vote of Ivorians October 22, 1995 triumph with some 95% of the votes of one and modest opponent Francis Wode candidate of the Ivorian Workers Party (PIT) a left training without means.

The heavyweights including opposition Ivorian Popular Front (FPI) of Laurent Gbagbo and the Rally of Republicans (RDR) had played active boycott to protest against an electoral code to remove the presidential race the only serious candidate Ouattara aside from politics to the International monetary Fund (IMF) where he pantouflait since 1994.

The vote was preceded by the most violent street protests in the country's history making twenty dead. For refusing to join the Republican army to maintain order during the general election campaign leader Robert Guei So Staff was sacked and charged to engineer a coup before being integrated to the government.

Legitimized by the polls - a score worthy of the best days of the single party - Bédié has not had the wisdom to seriously resume dialogue with opposition tempted therefore to define themselves along ethnic and religious regional centers will ignoring the example set by his predecessor. Old succeeded him to maintain the cohesion of the Ivorian nation; a challenge in a country rich in some eighty ethnic groups each with its own dialect where Islam from the North has gradually become to Christianity and animism.

SET PERDUE

He had the choice of opening to the West and strong ties with the former colonial power in an era when many young nations turned to Moscow. He also made the choice of French as one of the common denominators needed to Ivorians. He had decided not to establish a strong army and to rely on France to defend its own country thinking rightly avoid the inconvenience of coups and military coups others that were the rule during the last four decades in this part of the continent.

Felix Houphouet-Boigny had seated the reputation of the Ivory Coast on a recognized political and economic stability of all. After thirty years of single party he understood that he must submit to the rule of political pluralism induced by the fall of the Berlin Wall and the end of the Cold War. This is without excessive emotional that he had introduced a multi his country in the first half of 1990. A training sixties had emerged including a dozen still have some representation and four real influence.

Bédié has squandered the legacy of the Old. Assured of full support of Paris in the days of François Mitterrand as Jacques Chirac whose advise for African Affairs is none other than Michel Dupuch Ambassador in Ivory Coast for fourteen years he has been able to guarantee neither economic stability nor political stability. The countries where corruption and embezzlement of public money are going well and in conflict with international monetary institutions yesterday on yet considered a reference in Africa. Abidjan and major cities have long been the land of confrontation between the Democratic Party of Ivory Coast (PDCI former single party) Bedie and opposition embodied today by Gathering Republicans (RDR) party of Alassane Ouattara.

The stature and reputation of former Prime Minister rightly or wrongly, already worried Bedie's PDCI and the barons in 1995 which had given him bad trial by questioning his Ivorian nationality and had changed the electoral code forbid him to run for president. Mr.

Bedie and hawks of his party recurred this year. The return of Ouattara in Ivory Coast in July after his resignation from the IMF being elected head of the RDR on August 1 and the public announcement of his candidacy in the October 2000 presidential election caused panic in Bedie the camp again denies it Ivorian nationality.

FIEVRE XENOPHOBE

Power blamed a Burkinabé ancestry and have exhibited the Ivorian identity papers of fraudulent origin.

Following the opening of a judicial inquiry in September this case resulted in the issuance of an international arrest warrant by authorities in Abidjan.

Previously executives RDR were arrested during a demonstration under a law breakers anti sentenced to long prison terms. The party Ouattara His electoral machine was beheaded.

The controversy over the Ivorian former Prime Minister is not in honor of those who launched. The Ivory Coast is populated to a third of foreigners including Burkinabésde Guineans and Malians whose majority are Muslims Ouattara.

The appearance of this religious divide is even more disturbing because it doubles as a regional divide and the political parties - whatever people say - have undeniable ethnic foundations.

By placing the Ivorian in the center of the political debate and in the middle of an election campaign more than a year before the election clan Bedie has exacerbated resentment between communities born of the growing precariousness of disadvantaged sections of the population.

Incidents are many who put struggling ethnic Ivorians and immigrants but also Ivorians of different ethnic origin. The massive Burkinabe and Malians exodus exposed to the anger and violence of the Southwest population is a recent cruel and xenophobic push illustration that now prevails in Côte d'Iv-oireinduite by recent policy initiatives diet. Bédié fell locked into its contradictions for failing to play the game of modern democracy and liberalism. He believed he could handle the Ivory Coast and its citizens in old African leader. A fatal anachronism on the eve of 2000.

