THE democracy would it be so dangerous for Africa that we would come to prefer the power of weapons as a regulator of political life? Scheduled elections, they would constitute an excessive threat to come to stop the democratic process by force?

In short, she is a good system of democracy for some, unsuitable for other d?

These are the questions, beyond my personal fate, raised the military coup that has just suffered the Ivory Coast, until now one of few countries of stability and peace in Africa.

Indeed, how can we today decently justify taking power by force? How can we justify the principle of a coup? It seems that, for some observers, alas, Africa deserves it. This is certainly what I've read and heard in the media. Here putschist enOccident presented as Renaissance models, at the same time or the Organization of African Unity does not want to accept in it representatives whose reason for existence is based on a coup.

We would therefore like the thesis of young and brave soldiers liberating a country. But free from what? This deserves to be watched more closely, especially when a military junta installs, instead of a legitimate government, nine months before the elections, a team from the minority parties of the dissolved National Assembly.

Here is my part of truth.

The peaceful nature of the coup first. If the blood did not flow, it is because the mutiny was not repressed, becoming then, according to an obviously pre-designed scenario in coup Similarly, if I I finally had to give to stay on Ivorian soil is in order to avoid being enforced explicit threats of bloodbath that could have affected the French soldiers who had kindly protect me, but also, no doubt, the French community, and perhaps other foreigners living in ivory Coast.

On the rule of law. Traditionally, the authority's Ivorian ri have applied the laws. He Vagisse anticasseurs of the law, passed at the initiative of the government of Alassane Ouattara, in the days when he was prime minister, or that require Ivorian nationality to lead a political party, these texts were discussed and adopted by a parliament elected by universal suffrage. Do not forget. This applies even to those defining the conditions of eligibility for the presidency. I also wished, in his time, relax these conditions, but the legislator considered essential in a welcoming country on its territory 35% of foreign population, the President of the Republic is unquestionably of Ivorian origin.

Moreover, everyone knows that I was about to decide clemency against leaders of the Rally of Republicans (DR R), condemned as a result of breakages operated in Abidjan on 27 October. Even the rule of law could be challenged by some, because we were in a democracy, it is now bracketed by force of arms. Therefore, it is outside any legal procedure that the junta threatens, strikes, stop or blueprint, to the point that some thirty senior officers, all of Akan origin, are held, as well as ministers and senior officials whose only fault is to have loyally served the state.

Who would dare speak of freedom and independence of the judiciary, since the president of the Supreme Court arbitrarily arrested, the prosecutor who heard the false report and forgery of Mr. Alassane Ouattara identification was beaten and jailed, the judge responsible for making the decision was ordered to issue a dismissal for all proceedings, the same day of the arrival of Mr. Ouattara in ivory Coast, three days after the Coup d'Etat. Under what auspices fatal undertake justice and freedom in Ivory Coast?

For my training, my culture, I have always been a Democrat, I ruled my country in Liberal, I have no blood on their hands, not even that of a death sentence. I always made sure that fundamental freedoms, particularly freedom of expression and association, are total. And they were. So I am deeply saddened that a lead weight now weighs on any part of Ivorians who feel watched, listened to, and are forbidden to speak.

The press of the Democratic Party of Ivory Coast (PDCI) is absent from national debate because its journalists are hunted fugitives.

On corruption.

I probably have a practice too scrupulous with regard to the dignity of persons and accusations without evidence. Corruption in developing countries will not retreat with great speeches or sudden settling of audits conducted under the pressure of machine guns. For my part, whenever a malfunction has been brought to light, I encouraged a rapid and vigorous action of justice, as was the case in the EU dossier on health. Thus, several dozen people, including senior health officials, were imprisoned as a result of proven embezzlement. And as an incredible blow to the most elementary justice, they were released by the coup, as did thousands of common criminals who will now worsen insecurity, particularly in Abidjan.

On the financial situation. In 1993, I found a disastrous economic and financial situation. Thanks in part to the devaluation of the CFA franc, which would not have been possible without our determination, my country has returned to the path of growth, controlled inflation, developed investment and made important social programs. public service salaries have been paid.

The Ivory Coast has faced its obligations vis-à-vis donors, essential condition to qualify for relief or even the cancellation of the debt which swallows half of the state budget .

Collaboration with the European Union had taken and all corrective actions were adopted by mutual agreement. I even took the considerable risk to remove the compensation on the coffee and cocoa sectors, at the behest of donors, and thus justify international confidence.

These are the facts.

All this is now called into question. The Ivory Coast is the banning of nations by the coup.

It would be economically isolated, suspended its public and private investment, being reimbursed if the debt was postponed.

As for the argument that is the fault of my predecessor, he not only too used to be credible, but mostly it is not. I had made all the arrangements, from the privatization program and using bridging loans to ensure, during the first quarter, the normal functioning of the state and negotiate earnestly, during this period, international competitions necessary for the execution of our budget. The cancellation of this device is the sole responsibility of those who played with fire. They alone bear the responsibility before the Ivorian people and before history.

On the Ivorian. Was diverted from its original meaning, political calculation and desire to misinform, a noble and unifying concept. It was solely intended to forge a common culture for all people living on Ivorian soil, as foreign nationals. Precisely because the balances are fragile in a country welcoming so many foreigners, I wanted to create a vast movement of integration and assimilation, so that everyone living on our soil, all ethnic groups and regions, such as Burkinabe Ivorians , Guineans as Lebanese, all identify with a cultural synthesis and feel solidarity with the fate of the ivory Coast.

I observe that the main criticisms of the new management team in the Ivorian press, focus on its regional composition, which does not reflect the whole country. As for me, one of my political priorities was to achieve a balanced development of all regions of the Ivory Coast by a fair distribution of investments. In this regard, the media trial of development Daoukro took a deliberately polemical dimension, only because it is my country.

Remain, as always, the real issues, they talked about less. I think of course the weight of the debt that we removes any flexibility, and the decline in cocoa prices, which destabilizes the Ivorian economy far more than the expectation of support of donors. If globalization takes with one hand what it gives more than the other, this fool's bargain condemns developing countries.

Rest well, for realities sake, not to practice the worst policy. Despite the difficulties, beyond procrastination, while fighting against arbitrariness, everything must be done to implement the resolution of the conference of the Economic Community of West African States to organize, before June 2000 free and transparent elections.

I hope so with all my might that the current threats of instability and disintegration will yield not to the sovereign expression of the Ivorian people.

