(Summary) on the eve of the commemoration of the first anniversary of the proclamation of our independence, I wish to take this opportunity to speak to you over the airwaves, for there are many who have not' been able to come to the capital to take part in the demonstrations on the occasion of our national holiday. Our joy will not be complete if your hearts are not near ours and if we cannot utter the prayers together that our dear country may achieve in peace its march toward progress and friendship with all peoples. We are thankful to all those who have been able to answer our invitation. Thanks to your confidence I have been able to fight for the past 15 years to conduct the Ivory Coast toward international sovereignty and it is because of this confidence that I will continue the work of national construction in our country.

It was a year ago that I reminded you that independence in itself is not a panacea. I stressed all the difficulties awaiting us. During our' struggle for the independence of our country you have helped us. We have regarded as most important for our action the unity within our frontiers and it is with the greatest satisfaction that I have received your support. You have approved the establishment of the National Assembly, of the economic and social council, of the supreme court and that of the municipal governments. You have thus aided us in being represented in all levels of international life. But, all this would have remained without a future if we would not have searched for the necessary means to develop the economic and social life of the country. We have concluded agreements with several countries, especially with France. In the accords of aid and cooperation we have assured for your economy a stability thanks to which it can make progress in security. With the agreements concluded with France we have sought to assure f. j? our youth a better future. Soon the University of Abidjan will begin to function. Many sacrifices will be expected of our youth and we have instituted national military service.

In out proclamation of independence we have affirmed our desire to live in friendship with our neighbors and to live in peace with all nations of the world. We are going to keep this promise. Besides the friendship of the countries of the Entente we have won the support of the French-speaking African countries. We have also won the friendship and support of President Tubman, one of the founders of the conference of Monrovia.

Need For Peace

I shall never cease to repeat the need for peace. Our action for the construction of the state can bear real fruit only if we are not exposed to the constant fear of war. We shall make the greatest efforts to make peace a reality. We do not want it only for ourselves; we also want it for others. We want peace through realistic means, through negotiation, the only way for real reconciliation. It must be based on friendship and fraternity. The happiness of man can be reached only on this basis.

We must be the convinced partisans cf conciliation and we must do this in the service of peace. Each Citizen must work with all his efforts for peace among men, and thus the two objectives we must reach are progress within our country and friendly cooperation and peace with the other nations of the world. We shall attack from now on some of the remaining problems :	the improvement of the living standard of our

people to whom it is my great pleasure to render solemn homage.

In the second year of our independence we must pay attention to our particular needs. Discipline is necessary to achieve our desires. It must enter more and more into the picture. Only by growing discipline can we achieve what we need. Thus, we shall be able to start our march forward. We shall devote ourselves to the service of our nation.

We want to make the Ivory Coast a solid and prosperous nation. We want to make it an enthusiastic and happy country. Let us go ahead with our tasks.