We are convinced that the unity and solidarity of Ivorians in the face of the challenges of the times can overcome the uncertainties and the servitude that is going on in our universe, which has become unpredictable. As to how to go about this, it should be through dialogue, which is our practice of social rapprochement and an all-embracing political rallying.

We should not look elsewhere for the solution to our problems. It is within our own selves that we can have the strength capable of overcoming the dangers that assail us. National sentiment is the guide to our behavior. Patriotism, as a social function, should be cultivated constantly and Ivorian citizenship, our common parenthood, should be based on solidarity.

This is not paradoxical; man does not live by peace alone, he also lives by the ideal. There is no point in outlining projects for tomorrow if we are not sure of existing politically, I mean, as a nation that can be referred to in history. In the comity of nations of this world, to live without a fatherland is like existing without human rights. In this fluid atmosphere, our constant preoccupation should be the Ivorian nation first. For this nation our efforts to educate people about our institutions should be intensified in order to raise the political consciousness of all Ivorians. I believe such education should include the Democratic Party of Ivory Coast, our other institutions autonomous organizations, non-governmental organizations, associations of our families, and our schools. In the circles that I mention that carry out civic education, the duty of all those charged with this education is to inculcate a knowledge of democracy, a notion of the republic, and political culture. Yet on this basic and essential duty, people get confused and concentrate more on nonessentials.

In such a situation a betrayal of the fatherland can easily be hidden. We must redouble our efforts at civic education and popular self-education to counter the aberrations that abound in the rumors circulating in Abidjan.