Cote d'Ivoire's new junta pledged Monday to put the "house in order", form a national unity government and give an opposition leader wanted by ousted authorities a chance to run in democratic elections.

General Robert Guei, a former chief of staff accused in 1996 of plotting a coup against ousted president Henri Konan Bedie, addressed members of 38 political parties here and urged them to present a list of their most "determined candidates" for cabinet portfolios in a government to be formed next week.

Guei's National Committee of Public Salvation, the military body he formed after toppling Bedie on Christmas Eve, would retain control in four areas: the defense portfolio, to be headed by Guei himself, along with the ministries of security, foreign and internal affairs.

In an hour-long speech at Abidjan's army headquarters, Guei's promise to clean up public finances and widen the political arena received resounding applause, not least from members of the opposition Rally of Republicans (RDR).

An arrest warrant for the RDR's leader, Alassane Ouattara, was issued in November by deposed authorities. Seven of the party's senior officials were jailed in October for an anti-government demonstration that turned riotous.

Ouattara, who has been out of the country since September, is due back in Cote d'Ivoire on Wednesday.

Guei, a longtime political foe of Bedie who finally succeeded Sunday in forcing the autocratic ruler into exile, lambasted the former regime for holding on to power for four straight decades.

He condemned Cote d'Ivoire's Democratic Party (PDCI) for pursuing "divisive, hateful and contemptuous politics," and said he planned to "clear the way for Mr Alassane Dramane Ouattara" to run in eventual elections.

Bedie's party claimed that Ouattara, a former prime minister, had forged his identity papers, was not Ivorian but Burkinabe, and was not eligible to contest elections that were slated for October 2000.

"We had to get the ball rolling and help politicians to take the right road," Guei said.

"As soon as we have made sure that the house is in order, and that what we have done has received support from the Ivorian people, we will then pull back and stage free and transparent elections," Guei said.

The general gave no timetable for polls, but claimed he was "not seeking power" for himself.

He justified the overthrow of the democratically elected Bedie and the PDCI government on the grounds that under their leadership "we had become a country of pillagers of public funds and rodents chewing at state coffers."

Members of political parties, while visibly pleased at Guei's speech, reserved their comments.

"I must first consult my militants," said Laurent Gbagbo, president of the opposition Ivorian Popular Front (FPI).

Nevertheless, Gbagbo, who served under Guei in the military in the early 1970s, warmly greeted Cote d'Ivoire's new strongman.

Henriette Diabate, the RDR's secretary general who was imprisoned in late October, said her impression of Guei's address was "good."

Diabate and other senior RDR officials escaped from Abidjan's sprawling MAC A penitentiary when mutineers who had overthrown Bedie opened the doors of the premises on Friday and let them free. The total prison population, estimated at 6,500, also escaped.

The offer to help form a national unity government was also extended to members of the PDCI, some of whose officials attended the meeting. However, no former PDCI ministers were present at Monday's meeting, as several were believed to still held in custody by mutineers.

Bedie's former prime minister, Daniel Kablan Duncan, and his ex-ministers of security and defense followed the ousted president to Lome on Sunday.

The junta said it planned to have wide ranging talks this week with members of civil society, foreign diplomats, unions, religious leaders and traditional chiefs.

Bedie, who fled to Togo on Sunday aboard a French helicopter, paid a visit Monday to Nigeria where he held three hours of talks with President Olusegun Obasanjo.