Ivory Coast President Laurent Gbagbo described the attempted coup foiled in Abidjan as a ’’terrorist action” in a televised speech late Monday from his village of Mama in the south-west.

il/bm

Ivory Coast President Laurent Gbagbo described the foiled coup in Abidjan as a ’’terrorist action” in a televised speech late Monday from his village of Mama in the south-west.

All the political agenda, including partial elections to be held in the north of the country January 14, would be maintained, he said.

The attempted coup by unidentified assailants who attacked the radio and television stations was ’’more a terrorist action than an act of war,” Gbagbo said.

’’The people who attempted a coup are amateurs and children but they frightened the Ivorians and made Ivory Coast lose days of work,” he went on.

The head of state, speaking for the first time since the mutiny started at 11 pm (2300 GMT) on Sunday, said he had been ”on holiday” in his village since the end of last week.

He said he had been informed about the situation in Abidjan at 4 am and had ’’gone back to sleep.” Gbagbo added: ”We didn't think it was dramatic”.

Hinting he had been forewarned of the attempted coup, Gbagbo said: "You can't be placed where we are without knowing what people do.” For the "terrorists,” he declared, there was "no pardon.”

"We will let justice follow its course, we naturally hope it will be rigorous,” he added.

"The Ivorians are tired of sorcerers' apprentices.”

The assailants had taken over the radio and television stations early Monday before being rooted out by loyalist forces in heavy fighting.

il/bm

All of Ivory Coast's political agenda, including partial elections to be held in the north of the country January 14, would be maintained despite the attempted coup, Ivory Coast President Laurent Gbagbo said late Monday.

In a televised speech from his village of Mama in the south-west, the president described the coup foiled in Abidjan earlier in the day as a "terrorist action.”

"All the dates we have announced will be maintained,” Gbagbo declared, including the polls in the north and the inauguration of a new national assembly.

"We must be allowed to govern,” he added. The new assembly should start to vote on laws that would reshape the country.

The attempted coup by unidentified assailants who attacked the radio and television stations was "more a terrorist action than an act of war," Gbagbo said.

"The people who attempted a coup are amateurs and children but they frightened the Ivorians and made Ivory Coast lose days of work," he went on.

The head of state, speaking for the first time since the mutiny started at 11 pm (2300 GMT) on Sunday, said he had been "on holiday" in his village since the end of last week.

He said he had been informed about the situation in Abidjan at 4 am and had "gone back to sleep." Gbagbo added: "We didn't think it was dramatic".

Hinting he had been forewarned of the attempted coup, Gbagbo said: "You can't be placed where we are without knowing what people do." For the "terrorists," he declared, there was "no pardon."

"We will let justice follow its course, we naturally hope it will be rigorous," he added.

"The Ivorians are tired of sorcerers' apprentices."

The assailants had taken over the radio and television stations early Monday before being rooted out by loyalist forces in heavy fighting.