In his speech to the nation on 27 September, the head of state showed his intention to remain in power after 30 October, which marks the official end of his five-year term in office. "Le Patriote" analyzes and dissects this speech in all its aspects in the following feature.

A body language peculiar to a Hitler or Mussolini of the new era, a serious voice, sign of an uncontrolled anger, a martial tone. The manner of moving around the lectern and of expressing himself during his speech to the nation on 27 September in the evening expressed all the embarrassment, which took hold of the head of state since the discussion on the issue of the constitutional vacuum and the transition went in full swing. This is a warlike speech in vain, which gives the impression that Laurent Gbagbo has opted for the way of political suicide, where all observers expected him to deliver a conciliatory, rallying and reasonable message.

Instead, Gbagbo has opted for the worst and shortsighted politics, thus leaving the way open for all uncertainties. Not only did he clearly show his determination to stubbornly hang on to his throne after 30 October in total violation of the constitutional provisions, but he equally attacked his political opposition and army violently: " some politicians hope to take power by requesting the implementation of a transition. Such an attitude is against the constitution," he said, without batting an eyelid, accusing his opponents, who are asking for a transition. He did not spare his armed opposition. He accused it of inconsistency, insincerity and non-respect of what has been agreed upon. This is because, according to him, "in this Ivorian rebellion, those who talk are not those who decide." When we know that the man making this statement is an accomplished double-dealer, disavower and traitor, we realize that Gbagbo has a complete embodiment of contradiction.

But finally, he went further to challenge all his ECOWAS peers on the grounds that they have, once again, taken up the Ivorian file without his prior consent: "Why does the ECOWAS want to assess a mediation, which has already submitted its findings to the UN Security Council and received congratulations?," he asked, questioning the meaning of ECOWAS taking up the matter again. As if he dreaded the subregional organization, he answered his own question: " it is not wise for ECOWAS itself to be involved again in the Ivorian crisis. I will not accept any further mediation because there is no longer any negotiation to make." Gbagbo extended his threats to France, which, recently said, through its minister of defense, Michele Alliot-Marie, "indeed, there will be a constitutional vacuum after 30 October." France even gave its support to the joint ECOWAS and African Union initiative in the resolution of the crisis. This is the ECOWAS, which Gbagbo challenges bluntly. According to the entire national and international community, Laurent Gbagbo's speech, when analyzed, resembles a "casus belli,” in all likelihood, as if Gbagbo is declaring war on the Ivorians, ECOWAS, African Union, France, etc.

With his head low, eyes closed and ears rendered deaf by the flattery of his entourage, Gbagbo is rushing straight into the wall. The irony is that he wants to carry along with him the entire Cote d'Ivoire, which, unfortunately, no longer makes the best of his presence in power after 30 October. This suicidal attitude recalls the scorpion, which, feeling lost, decides to infect itself with its own venom. Will Gbagbo go right to the end of the scorpion logic? Does he simply have the courage and determination? To say the least, will he be able to resist the wind of change, which is now blowing throughout Cote d'Ivoire? This is the change, which all Ivorians are asking for. And it is the change all the entire international community is hoping for.