Your Excellencies present here, and all of you who came to welcome us, I would like to start by apologizing, for I do not speak Luganda, and I do not know English. I will therefore talk to you in Kinyarwanda, and those who are versed in English will help me.

The bloodshed in Luwero was not in vain. Those who died served as seeds that you have sown, and which have produced fruits, namely the policy Museveni brought you and the awareness that it is Ugandans who should build their own country. We support this new policy of President Museveni because it is a policy which aims at bringing peace to Uganda, which seeks peace for Uganda. We support it because it is a policy which aims at uniting all Ugandans, so that together they can build their country. We support this policy.

I call on all Rwandans living in Uganda to support this policy. As President Museveni said earlier, we know that there are Rwandans who came here, some seeking employment and school opportunities, and some fleeing political conditions that were inimical to them. As you know, there used to be a monarchy in Rwanda. In 1959 we overthrew the monarchy. This situation brought about turmoil in the country. As a result many people fled. Among those who fled, some are here in Uganda. This took place 30 years ago. Those who fled obtained refugee status, and they have been living here since that time. We held talks on this problem when President Museveni came to Rwanda recently. Even now, during my visit to Uganda, we have come back to this problem because it has lasted long enough. We have still got to find acceptable solutions to it.

The first thing I would say on this problem of Rwandan refugees living here in Uganda — or rather the problem of Rwandan refugees — is that it is primarily a Rwandan problem. It is a problem for all Rwandans. I am saying this because there are those who think or have said that the Rwandan state wants to evade the problem of the Rwandan refugees and hand it over to other countries. No. we know well that this is primarily a Rwandan problem.

However, we have agreed on many occasions that in seeking a complete and acceptable answer to the problem. Rwanda on its own cannot find a solution without the cooperation of the countries harboring the Rwandans and all friendly countries. There are many reasons why Rwanda alone cannot find a complete solution to the problem of Rwandan refugees. One of them is land.

If anyone does not know the current situation in Rwanda, he can come and see for himself if he wishes. It is the duty of our embassies to help him do so. Their duty is to help people to visit Rwanda. One would then see the stale of the land problem. The Rwandan population is currently estimated at 6.5 million in an area of 26,000 sq. km. If you make calculations, you can understand how overpopulated Rwanda is. There are 6.5 million people in an area of 26,000 sq km. This is the legacy of the colonial powers. As you know, when the colonialists made borders for Africa, they took a map. Sitting back at home, they drew lines on the map. That was it. Rwanda was given 26,000 sq km. After drawing their lines on the map they left that small piece for us.

This is, therefore, a problem we should keep in mind, that Rwanda is a small country with many people. That is why Rwanda stresses that the problem of Rwandan refugees should not be left to Rwanda alone. I do not want to talk at length about this problem of refugees. In brief, I said that the problem is primarily a Rwandan affair. However, in order to find satisfactory solution, we must seek the assistance of friends. After all, this is what friendship is all about. We have to cooperate with countries harboring Rwandans and all other foreign countries willing to help us.

The other point I would like to stress when I speak about this problem, is that I, Habyarimana, believe that a person does not transmit refugee status to his child, grandchild, and great grandchild. No one would accept that. If you fled, your child or the grandchild you will have is not concerned with your problem. In most cases he does not even know your problem. My feeling is that the first step toward a solution of the problem is that the term refugee should be dropped. There should be Rwandans of Rwanda and Rwandans living outside Rwanda, but not Rwandans who fled from Rwanda. Once such people are no longer called refugees, they can come if they have the means, or they can ask to stay where they are, just like anyone else living abroad, but without being called refugees.

Moreover, in accordance with the policies of our subregional organizations, such as the Kagera Basin Organization, the Economic Community of the Countries of the Great Lakes, and the PTA, I think that we can find a solution to such problems, for, under their policies, there should be free movement of people and right of settlement. Therefore, our people should be able to move where they want to, visiting each other.

If we uphold and fulfill these policies, such problems should not be difficult to solve, because they would be dealt with through the established principles of good-neighborliness in the spirit of mutual help.

This is what I wanted to tell you about this problem of Rwandan refugees. Firstly, that it is primarily a Rwandan problem, but that Rwanda alone cannot solve it without the help of countries harboring Rwandan refugees. Secondly, a person cannot transmit his refugee status to children and great grandchildren. Thirdly, we feel that the current African policy of forming organizations of neighboring countries, in order to cooperate and bring about development, shows that the problem can be resolved satisfactorily if we follow those policies.

