The Central Committee of the MRND movement has met today under the chairmanship of President Juvenal Habyarimana. In his address, the President has summarised the measures which were taken by the government during the war period in order to defeat the enemy.

The President explained that since the war broke out the government had taken measures, political and economic together with military steps. In order to solve quickly the big problems and keep the unity of our country.

Maj-Gen Juvenal Habyarimana praised the bravery of our armed forces who repelled and defeated the rebels who had invaded our country. In fact, some of the people in foreign countries didn't believe their ears when they heard that our forces had recaptured Kagitumba northern border post - excuse me - had recaptured Kagitumba, the first post to be captured by the enemy when he started his attack, the President said.

Since that defeat, the enemy has now adopted the tactics of invading secretly, killing the people and destroying things and then go back from where he came from. The attacks of the enemy are now concentrated [two words indistinct] along the border with Uganda.

The President reiterated his call to national unity and warned against enmity among the people on tribal or regional basis. He insisted on maintaining the peace we have enjoyed for the first 17 years. President Habyarimana touched on the speech he gave on the 15th of last month, when he warned the people against falling into traps laid by the enemy. The intention of the enemy was to make the Rwandese start fighting each other on tribal reasons. The attack of the enemy was not in the Mutara region only, but they attacked us through the international media. They muddied the image of Rwanda by showing that the Rwandan government was not respecting the human rights, but we defended ourselves by allowing the members of diplomatic corps in Rwanda and journalists from foreign countries to visit the people who had been arrested in connection with the attack which was made to our country. The foreign journalists were allowed to talk to them and take some photographs. The President explained that we did all that because we didn't suspect ourselves. We did so because we wanted to show the world that they had been cheated by the enemy. We have proved to the world that the respect of human rights in Rwanda was not in mere words but was done practically.

President Habyarimana last briefed the Central Committee members on the trips he made in neighbouring countries and abroad in efforts to stop the war which was going on. He said that though the Rwanda government had accepted to stop the war, it was the enemy who violated that agreement. Up to now the enemy has not yet agreed to stop the fighting. The cease-fire was supposed to be followed by the installation of a peace force which would have the duty of making sure that the boundaries of our country were not violated. He said that Rwanda was still waiting for the establishment of that force. He said that Rwanda was ready to receive other ideas which may prove to be beneficial.

When they found that they had militarily failed, the enemies fabricated other lies against Rwanda, such as to say that it was not doing enough to solve the question of refugees and that there was no democracy. But in actual fact, the enemy attacked us when we were on the verge of solving the question of refugees, especially those living in Uganda, and when we had just started some political reforms. They attacked because they wanted to overthrow the government and they were afraid of democracy. That is why they chose to use guns in order to take power.

With the help of friendly countries and the UNHCR, the Rwandan government will do all its efforts to solve the question of Rwandan refugees peacefully. On the question of political reforms, the President said that the reforms will be speeded up and asked all the Rwandese wherever they are to give their opinions on that subject. On the same subject, the President said that though the referendum on [the] political charter will be held before 15th June next year, any Rwandan who would like to establish his political party can start thinking about it now.

On the question of new identity cards which will be distributed in the near future, he said that the aim was to strengthen the security of the people. He that the present identity card was easy to be copied and it was done by the enemy. The new identity card will be up to date and in conformity with the international law which requires that no tribe is indicated on the identity card. However, that decision does not deprive anybody of his tribal rights, nor does it give privileges to any tribe.

President Habyarimana also warned against retrogressive ideas which may disrupt the achievements of the 1959 People's Revolution and of the Cultural Revolution of 1973. We have to advance instead of going back. That is why all the time we have to be very watchful so that we don't fall into traps laid by the enemy who is planting enmity among the people, spreading rumours and distorting the reputation of Rwanda. The President strongly warned the rumour and warmongers in Rwanda.

On the economic situation during the war, the President said the government tried its level best to make sure that essential commodities were available all over the country. The government also started to implement the structural adjustment programme it agreed between it and the World Bank and the IMF. Some of the friendly countries have promised that they will support our structural adjustment programme and we hope that our economy will improve.

The President asked the Central Committee members to discuss ways of strengthening the unity of the people so that to console the people who have been disturbed by the war so that all the Rwandans feel that they are the children of one parent.

