Rwandans, dear friends of Rwanda: Today is the 30th time that we have celebrated the regaining of our political independence

The problem of Rwandan refugees was once about to be definitively solved on the basis of the agreement between Rwanda and Uganda under the auspices of the UN High Commission for Refugees [UNHCR] and the OAU. Once again we recall all the initiatives which had been taken in preparation for the agreement, those that we had already taken or some on several occasions, such as the total liberalization in providing Rwandan passports to every Rwandan claiming to be a refugee and recognized as such by the UNHCR and other initiatives. We know well that through the play of historical, economic pressures, and the problem of Rwandan peoples in the region of the great lakes, Rwandan refugees are members of the Rwandan Patriotic Front.

They must know that our country is united and that it would like to welcome all its sons and daughters as brothers and sisters and as friends. They should know that war is not the best way to convince us about their good intentions. That is why, to prove our goodwill toward them, on 14 March 1991 the Rwandan Government unilaterally proposed an immediate general amnesty and full guarantee of security to those of our compatriots who are attacking us, on the condition that they go to designated areas, lay down their arms, and make a commitment to halting the fight against their brothers and sisters.

In order for everything to be done to safeguard national unity, which always has and always will be important, the nonsensical war must end. That is why the Rwandan Government will continue to do everything to negotiate successfully with the aggressors, with the assistance of friendly countries, so as to find a definitive solution which is acceptable to our country and which allows it is the guarantee of a happy future.

For this to be the case, there will be a need for our country to be perfectly united so that the Rwandan Government may negotiate in the knowledge that the entire Rwandan population is united and strong behind it.

There will be a need for the entire population, all political parties and all gallant forces of the country, to unite in supporting the Rwandan Armed Forces so that they may continue to guarantee the territorial integrity of our country and our survival and consequently be in a strong position at the negotiations. I therefore today call upon all political parties to continue to be fully united behind the government, of which the declarations of.

Elections will take place in accordance with a schedule, in a completely open way, with the participation of all interested forces, and without forgetting the contribution of international observers who will witness the rigor and honesty with which the elections are carried out.

If democracy is to be a major asset which will guide us in the decade that our country begins today, there will be a need for responsible attitudes. Men and women involved in politics and all those who have a vocation are called upon to play the role of teacher and not engage in demagogy.

I would like to call upon the international community once again to show solidarity with the regions of our country which have been seriously affected by the war by providing, once again, massive national and international assistance to the war victims. It is the development of democracy which will allow all the regions of our country to defend their place within an entity that they will have contributed to creating and for which they will ceaselessly define the.

