What can I do personally? Take part in the debate I only set the orientations and not my own. We are in a multiparty system. Orientations must be chosen collectively and this is what is being done, contradictions and misunderstandings must be removed so that the peace agreements can be implemented.

We need to finalize the agreements and to explain to the population why they were finalized and what is in them, since they will be implemented by the population. If a large part of the people of Rwanda feel frustrated, then there is a risk that what you mention might actually happen. The risk will be lessened if the agreement is actively supported by the population, that is, if our representatives really speak on behalf of the people, is not always the case effort.

We said that, unfortunately, clashes and massacres did occur in Gisenyi, Ruhengeri, and Kibuye. We acknowledged this, we regretted and condemned it. We must do everything that we can to prevent it from happening again. But if things did go out of hand in government-controlled areas, how many massacres were there in the FPR-controlled areas about which no mention whatsoever was made, even though the report was released after the 8 February attack? We deplored that conclusions with respect to the president’s responsibility were drawn from the allegations of one single witness and a suspect one; namely, a journalist who is now in jail.

Three days? This surprises me, it would be necessary to confirm this. We have reinforced security, taken a series of administrative and legal steps against the offenders, and created a Human Rights Commission to advise the government. In my speeches, I always end up stressing that we must all learn to get along together. Since the beginning, I have striven to promote unity.

This is quite possible. Nevertheless, I did make appeals for calm, and I thought that it would suffice.

I never said that they were scraps of paper. I said the very thing that I said to you.

Nevertheless, I did not say scraps of paper. As to the Interahamwes, we need to agree on what constitutes a militia. Some of them did have uniforms. But other party youths wear a cap or a tie, it is a kind of uniform. We would have to take a look at the behavior of every party.

This is a difficult question, since it means voicing a judgment on myself. We need to see what the population wants. What am I advised to do? The decision is in the hands of the party. My wish is to continue to contribute to national reconciliation.

