Rwandan People,

Listen to this important statement of the Security Forces. You all are unaware that recently the enemies of peace have disturbed public order by sowing discord and division of the country into regions of small groups. The National Unity was threatened, peace might be jeopardized. He who had been elected by the people, Grégoire Kayibanda for which we keep also many respects, has been caught in the clutches of the enemies of peace: the very people who will not understand that all Rwandans brothers of any region they come. These enemies of peace had their destructive referred the prisoner of the State Chief.

This atmosphere we did that too tolerated. This night, the country would sink into the abyss forever. You will have all the explanations in the coming days.

The National Guard has always obeyed; but in such a situation it can not stand idly by.

The National Guard - your own children - can never tolerate the country to be cut into pieces. She can not condone hatred and regional factions. She refuses the regional limitations recommended by the enemies of National Unity.

As a result, Rwanda, Rwanda, the National Guard with his Chief Major General Juvenal Habyarimana just make important decisions:

All political activities are prohibited throughout the whole of the Republic. Every citizen should go about their normal activities. The Government, although it was also nothing is removed. The Secretaries General provide the general course of current business irrespective of ethnicity or region of origin. It is created a committee called "Committee for Peace and National Unity" in charge of restoring peace and unity in the country. This committee replaces the Government to the full restoration of national peace. The Prefectural Administration is ensured by the Commanders of space. The mayors continue to administer their common in peace and national development. The various Party organs are suspended. The National Assembly is dissolved. All foreigners are asked to go about their normal activities. All agreements and treaties with foreign countries or International Organizations will be respected.

This release comes from the High Command of the National Guard.

General-Major; Lieutenant-Colonel KANYARENGWE; Major-shirts; Major Rwanda; _ Major Biology; Major GAH1MANO; Major KANYANDEKWE; Major SERUBUGA; Major BUREGEYA; Major NTIBITURA; Major SIMBA.

LONG LIVE THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA, LIVE PEACE AND NATIONAL UNITY, LONG LIVE THE PEOPLE OF RWANDA.

