Comrades Members of the Committee for Peace and National Unity, the President of the Supreme Court, Ambassadors, Ladies and Gentlemen,

On the morning of July 5, 1973, the antennas of Our National Radio, we sent you our decision with the assistance of all the senior officers of the National Guard. The dispersal of these officers in different corners of the country to lower functions of rank - program which was also in its infancy - was already a symbol of the desired political disintegration and maintained by former diet.

We said NO to this disintegration policy maintained by a handful of malicious and cynical took advantage of the fatigue of the former leader.

We said NO to a policy discord and intrigue, we could not longer accept a cascade of brutal decisions, often thoughtless, sloppy by irresponsible in the corridors and vestibules.

We said NO to the monopoly of one region at the expense of different values ​​spread over lé rest of the country. (See the composition of the former government, see the composition of our old missions abroad, see the places in central government and parastatals). The most destructive nepotism had plagued our services.

We said NO to injustice. The fault can be regional. It must be pursued whatever the origin of its author.

We said NO to selfish decisions. And the night of July 4 to 5, we escaped a heinous plan cynical, worthy only of the wickedness of those who prepared it. A list of personalities to eliminate was drafted by the entourage of former President Kayibanda. It was only by a miracle that He who speaks now escaped the trap set for him July 5, 1973 at one in the morning. He was the first to disappear, followed by a massacre of more frightful.

We said NO to this flood most dedicated of child blood Our Country.

If our 1959 social revolution was a decisive step for the emancipation of Rwandan masses noble acquisitions of this revolution had been swallowed up in hatred, immobility, nepotism and regional favoritism.

We wanted to build our beloved country, a new era, an era of Peace, Unity and national concord The statement read on national radio and the statement that we sent to the nation Friday, July 6, 1973 contain the essentials of basic our action and our goals.

Domestically

We want a government team and an administration that are healthy, strong, competent and meeting a good ethnic and regional balance. The first duty of our action is to safeguard the public tranquility as at the borders and intérieui of the Republic tranquility to guarantee the safety of people and property. To get there it's on you, Rwanda and Rwandans, we base our hopes, your calm, your wisdom, your determination of a solid peace of hearts. Everyone must work to safeguard the peace and national security. This research of Peace and Unity among all citizens will be the main objective of the Ministry of Interior. To achieve this objective the Ministry will focus in priority to the restructuring of the Commune, basic cell of national development.

The Commune, being the closest level of government to the people, it must also be best suited to help the masses to develop. It must play a fundamental role in the economic and social development of the nation. It is for these reasons that we are considering restructuring to better organize the management of progress by its population and to orientate the public and private efforts in the development. The Mayor should feel primarily responsible for the overall development. It must be able to organize and coordinate the actions of the forces of the Commune. The Commune, stripped of all intrigues of petty politics is to become a social activity radiation center, economic and cultural. The head of the department also manage the staff of the Central Administration. He will insist that the country maintains painfully Public Service needs the maximum efficiency of every employee.

We can no longer accept the administrative inertia that had ossified any central government. You all know that the policy that we have ended had infused into the public service principles absurd. The best elements of the central government were prosecuted for their initiatives. One who did nothing, or who spent his time -voler records to obscure their activities, this one was the biggest favorite of the regime. I know that with us you said NO to this situation.

Thus in the central administration the maximum yield should be required, initiatives must be stimulated, the errors must be corrected. We all know that to err is human and that only one who does nothing does not hurt to know. In terms of commitments, placements and promotions, we ask the leaders to be guided by the most equitable principles taking into account the real capacities and respecting ethnic and regional balance. Strict control of commitments is necessary to avoid the plethora of negative economic development staff. The surplus of available staff will be oriented productive sectors.

The calm necessary for national development also pinning its hopes on the efficiency and the legendary discipline of our Security Forces. We define then the National Guard that we continue to improve the means both in personnel and equipment, given our possibilities. The training program, as well as our future officers of our NCOs will be designed to provide the National Guard personnel more competent to deal with all technical and human problems that arise. An organizational study has already been initiated for the effective use of our military schools. We was imposed abruptly remove Service of the National Police. This is the past. For control and maintaining security inside, we nevertheless seems necessary to think in the near future provide the country with a police light but very effective.

Pending the establishment of this body, the National Guard should be organized to meet the exigeances of these two components of the maintenance of peace and national security. The security forces are placed under the same authority under the Ministry of National Defense.

Those who refuse to our call for calm and unity will be prosecuted and punished in proportion to their offenses. We rely on the competence and fairness of Ministers Responsible for Justice. They can not claim any reason to justify the staff performance failure, the cumulative judgments to run. What we ask is to sacrifice for justice in faithfulness, dedication and integrity. The head of the Ministry of the Justice Department, assisted by the prosecutor, will organize for better performance, the prosecutor, the courts and tribunals.

The Ministry of Justice will ensure effective and ongoing collaboration between the government and the Supreme Court. This, mainly by its Supreme Court, must ensure that the judgments of different courts comply with the law and equity. This Court is also judging the dignitaries of the Republic. The Supreme Court is also responsible for its sections of the State Council and Court of Auditors to give legal opinions on the presidential decrees and ministerial decrees and other regulations and judge the accounts of public accountants. You will have understood by then that the functions of the "Courts" are now assigned to the Ministry of Justice, while the Constitutional Court section is currently not applicable.

On the socio-economic problems are more complex. Security can not be ensured if people continue to eat poorly, to stay bad to dress poorly and vegetate in ignorance and unemployment. Security can not be ensured if the socio-economic problems are gradually solved. We need the truth and to disappoint you, we dare say that the coup carried out on 5 July can not work a miracle on the socio-economic level. The Government changes. The problems of our country are: the poverty of our soil and our basement; the population explosion of our people.

What the new government can promise the people of Rwanda is to tackle all these socio-economic problems with more imagination, more efficiency, more realism. First a master plan should be developed that will be recorded programs with short and medium terms. The program must be realistic and consider the possibilities of our resources. Thus the Ministry of Planning is responsible for this great task of the direction of national development.

At the Ministry's Assistant service resource responsible for research and exploitation of our resources. It is bold to assert that our basement contains nothing when no deep exploration confirms us. The mining will be done in a rational way and in accordance with a specific mining policy to avoid a too rapid depletion of our natural resources; an effort prospecting and search for new resources and new, more appropriate operating procedures is required.

Our Lake Kivu methane gas has a lot of promise and our cordial relations with Zaire herald possible exploitation and multifaceted.

The past has disrupted the dynamics of groups necessary to national development through the enthronement of regionalism and nepotism, unequal distribution .Des social services: hospitals, clinics and schools. The masses knew no mobilization for participation in the development effort.

The Department of Public Health and Social Affairs will therefore ensure both to preserve and promote the health status of each member of the Rwandan community, but also in coordination with the Department of Youth, to mobilize everyone for common development effort. Public Health must be designed in two aspects: First medicine must be a mass of medicine and be more focused on the most vulnerable groups, children, mothers and workers.

Finally spending on health issues must be considered as a profitable investment, because saving lives and maintaining excellent health, it improves production and promotes the socio-economic development. The specifically social services will strive to basic problems of the Rwandan family, problems of Labor and Social Security. In employment policy, they will ensure the ethnic proportions of the active forces of the nation and progressive Rwan-zation of the private sector. Community development policy must be pursued: the promotion of Rwandan women, the development of the cooperative and mutualist movement, popular education in all its aspects, are all points that the concerned officials must translate into concrete and realistic program. The development aid service must be strengthened both in human resources in material and financial resources in order to encourage the creation and development of small businesses not only in cities but mainly in rural areas.

As for the problems posed by the demographic growth of the Rwandan people, we are aware, and they will constantly draw our serious attention. However, we believe that caution is needed for those who are tempted to apply quick fixes, the result of some literature which its authors selfishness is thinly veiled. The solution we seek is a solution that is Rwandan, considering our mentality, our moral values, our culture, our possibilities and human solidarity.

The Social Services should also be concerned, more than in the past, the home improvement both in the rural areas than in urban areas, using as much as it can, local materials.

Economically we believe that the past has not sufficiently struggled against fraud. Second part of the investments, loans were poorly distributed, distribution based on the origin of the people and not according to the priorities set by the National Development Plan. Projects were removed in a region where their success was already assured by a secular experience to be transferred in a region where the experiment had never been started.

Embezzlement of public funds have been the subject of any lawsuit. Tax revenues were not seen following the legal provisions; they were limited to the minimum possible to avoid offending the electoral interests and not hamper the position of politicians. The Ministry of Finance and Economy will avoid past abuses. It is designed to search the revenue the state needs and ensure their efficient use. The internal and external trade which the artisans are the main taxpayers to state finances, are attached to this Ministry to better monitor progress.

The most immediate task is to study and rehabilitation of the 1973 budget including the establishment was set without taking into account the realities and which was heavily offset by the different events of this year.

Adding that now the regular budget and development budget will form two parts of a whole: the General State Budget. In its mission to promote national economic development through economic development, in its role of encouraging "save to best use," the Ministry of Finance and Economy is responsible for promoting cooperatives popular savings and loans .

So credit agencies must restructure to be able to strengthen the investment capacity of local communities and families; they must promote and finance micro-projects in rural areas by providing credit to the craft, agricultural modernization, progress livestock, local trade, etc. We regret that credit institutions have so far been oriented luxury housing construction financing and purchase of cars, not productive for the country, to the detriment of the promotion of small industry and the Arts and crafts. The immediate concern should be to the training of cadres necessary for this industry and this craft, to the study of local, regional and national, and the launch of the first units in the cities that are the most likely to receive and support these units.

The Rwandan economy must be made more dynamic, more independent and ultimately more viable starting concrete and realistic data of the country. Given the current economic structure, growth prospects of the economy appear to be highly dependent on the scale that will achievements in agricultural development and investment. In the area of ​​trade, the Government will take necessary measures to facilitate access to this profession by our fellow traders. The Government will maintain the principles of free trade and free competition.

It will promote coexistence, friendly and harmonious relations between national and foreign traders. The rwandisation piogressive at all levels including management should be continued in all sectors of activity. The Government does intervene only if private secteui failure and urgent need to defend the public interest.

The Government believes that our fellow traders are organized as quickly as possible to take over not only retail, but the wholesale import and export, industrial activities, concession and representation of brands Foreign as well as the tertiary sector. A serious preparation in advance is necessary in order to avoid past mistakes and their harmful effects on our economy, following a sudden decision and thoughtless.

The Government will adopt an appropriate price policy to allow our producers, forces of the country, to receive fair compensation for their efforts. Economic progress and even the stability of production conditions can not be maintained and be confirmed without adequate professional training sustained effort in all areas and at all levels. This training should actually be pursued in a conscientious, active and concrete. The Government will rely on the good will of our main leaders and managers of technical assistance for achieving this primary objective.

The Government will attach particular importance to foreign technical assistance really do enjoy Rwanda and its people by the hardware implementation of projects and the actual increase in the technical qualification of our countrymen who work with foreign experts within of that package.

It would be necessary at the end of each mission Rwandan counterparts can not only run without the projects undertaken in spurts but gain technical knowledge to ensure their own future extensions of the projects. The actual implementation of the aid control must be done in a way phis serious. It is the same for the coordination and management of this aid. To ensure the planned development program, the Government will need even greater support of friendly countries, international and regional organizations.

Finally come our Public Finance. These must be cleaned because no economic development can not result from a constantly exaggerated budget deficit. The following measures should be taken urgently:

removal of superfluous expenses; more realistic estimate of revenue and expenditure; strict implementation of the budget; improving methods of verification and collection of taxes; control and systematic monitoring and more serious expenditure commitments of the various agencies of government; serious control of the management of state property.

Better coordination and harmonization of fiscal policies, fiscal, financial, monetary and trade is essential.

The management and the structural organization of parastatals and other organizations controlled by the state will be modified to allow them to have a real administrative and financial autonomy and a cost effective and efficient management. A lead agency will be designated to monitor and control their management and to coordinate their activities. These companies should be a source of revenue for the budget and not a charge.

We must work now to ensure adequate supply to the real needs of our people. In collaboration with the National Bank and other relevant services in relation to the commercial world, a policy of imports and exports should be designed without any delay.

The effectiveness of this department is critical to the vitality of the economic life of our country. We believe in helping the objectives assigned to him by the creation of a national economic policy council, to propose the outlines of economic policy, priorities and review the results achieved. As for the investment effort of national we are not of those who are jealous of individual efforts Investment Rwandans. The Rwanda will be developed by his own son. The stranger will come only when he realizes that everything is peaceful and that its investments promise the most benefits.

So we will promote credits given to Rwandans in the areas of development. The lending agencies will, however, ensure the recovery of credits granted. Foreign aid can only be complementary to that effort.

Our policy with regard to external relations has been clearly defined in the first release of the Committee for Peace and National Unity, and in our first message è Nation: improvement of friendly relations with our immediate neighbors policy of first, relationship tarnished by conflicts unnecessarily maintained; with member countries of the OAU then, and finally improve friendships with countries that help the development of our country. Our constant concern: safeguard international peace in the framework of human solidarity. Our plenipotentiaries and our correspondents will be guided in their missions, these principles.

The Foreign Ministry also takes its responsibilities in the area of ​​cooperation. We are a poor country and we know that our globe we share with more affluent countries. The true human solidarity request, urges them to support us in our development efforts. However, we also know that if Rwanda needs a foreign aid, it can not serve as an alibi for national inaction. The development of our country must first, Rwanda and Rwandans rely on our effort.

The people must be regularly informed of any plans regarding the into participating in its realization knowingly. The Head of State, Ministers and heads of the various areas of development have to go regularly to the people to associate it with the effort and progress of the country. The Information Services must draw at the level of each department and each prefecture and Commons for a general mobilization. The staff of these services must be adequately trained poui to meet its responsibilities. The elements of a healthy information should be drawn from the source of our Rwandan culture.

As for tourism, it must be an engine of economic, social and cultural, not an opportunity to degeneration of morals. Appropriate regulation must be designed, training enough staff and able to be started without delay to address the development of this sector that looks very fast. The beauty of the country is ready for a flourishing tourism. Uncontrolled tourism and nonselective, however, could create adverse social contrasts.

The current problems of education in Rwanda caught our attention. The Ministry of Education should ensure the coordination of all studies, to be attended by representatives of various sectors ,, to find a better direction of education in Rwanda. The financial efforts for this important sector must remain in the proportions (reasonable for the entire budget. Thus primary education must be designed, not to lead to secondary school, but to give the nation responsible citizens able to participate meaningfully in the overall development effort.

The means which Rwanda may have will not allow us any time soon to send to secondary schools more than 10% of children complete primary school: it is to say that within several years, the result of primary education is for more than 90% to integrate into the production group, and mostly in rural areas.

This is why the primary education program should be designed primarily to enable the youth to get out of this cycle, well equipped to face life, to participate effectively in national development. The design and production of teaching materials must obey this concern. The implementation of local school must be well designed to contribute to this goal: time of concentration to form development poles rang. Secondary schools remain, of course, but they must be reorganized to be able to welcome some 10% of young gifted people who have completed primary education. The training school should respond to development needs by training middle managers. It will be more technical, more specialized, more oriented than general.

Only a number of talented young people especially who have completed the full cycle of the secondary will have access to university education: there too, the needs of national development will control the orientation of students: only disciplines that do not exist in our schools higher and university can benefit from study abroad scholarships.

We recognize that the student and the student must now gradually Getting the responsibilities that await them in national life. But that it be noted once and for all: that they are not students or students who have to run the schools. On the other hand, it is understandable that admission to various schools will reflect the social composition, ethnic and regional Rwandan society. Moreover, consideration could be given to self-learners who have the desire to improve their level of national juries studies to award diplomas equivalent to those awarded at the end of a complete cycle in an official or accredited school. So the Department of Education is responsible for the educated youth. There is one other active category, that of the non educated Youth.

The Ministry of Youth is responsible for scheduling and achieve the integration of the youth in the national development: it will focus its civic education and preparation for working life, life for most is leads in rural areas, so an agricultural base and craft training as well as the cooperative movement must be given to them. The organization of this leisure-school youth in both rural and urban areas will attract the attention of this Ministry. Its effectiveness can not be full if it succeeds immediately to ensure his presence in every municipality for deep mobilization.

But the Rwandan population is predominantly rural, agricultural everything before. This is why the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock must approach the rural population more than in the past. It will have immediate priority concern to benefit the rural population conclusive results of research organizations such as ISAR. For this, effective leadership of this population is necessary: ​​agricultural instructors must receive training sufficient basis to fulfill their mission; everyone should be able to have in its sector of an embodiment model, both in agriculture and livestock: it must be above all a facilitator who leads by example and able to lead its neighbors in the struggle for development . In addition, each municipality must have a model station for the recycling of monitors and training other progressive farmers.

The erosion control, reforestation, agricultural intensification improving technique and the fertilizer are all priority issues requiring attention of leaders at all levels.

The agricultural development program can only be effective if it is based in rural areas.

We rely on all the technical services of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, and especially those of the design bureaus to help municipalities, cooperatives, companies and even individuals, to have profitable projects and achievable , given the opportunities that may be released.

Particular attention must be maintained on our industrial production and exports: coffee development program, tea, pyrethrum, the cinchona, cotton, should be continued, fixing the producer price must ensure compensation fair of his work and his encouragement to increase efforts for the sake of his family and his country.

The Rwandan people is growing very fast and we have to feed all those mouths, which is why our agricultural research services must intensify their activities, especially in the diversification and performance of food products. Better organization of conserving products and domestic trade should we avoid seasonal scarcity and rising prices, which are observed regularly.

It is therefore necessary to: seek better productivity with the introduction of modern farming methods, erosion control measures, rational use of fertilizers and implementation of a rural development plan; the best use of assets related to the specific conditions of Rwanda (physical environment, climate, labor abundance) and make our country a privileged operating profitable and exportable crops; organize proper storage system for food products - to make possible the increase of the volume of production of these products, the regulation and stabilization of domestic prices.

This system also allows our farmers to market their entire production at a fair price corresponding to fair compensation for their efforts. A similar organization will be established for the processing and marketing of livestock products. Ensuring the most diversified export markets and better distributed geographically to export our products to obtain greater security for their marketing.

The development can not be achieved in isolation; our country being landlocked, the Ministry of Posts and Communications, through its specialized technical services, will play a primordial role. The stations, radio and telephones, transportation are all major branches of international as well as national communications. A major effort must be made to the various parts of Rwanda are served; contacts for regional and international collaboration will continue to improve our communications networks.

Urban planning, civil buildings, roads and bridges, the equipment are entrusted to the Ministry of Public Works and Equipment. It is responsible for preparing master plans for development of cities and urban centers of Rwanda and uphold in achieving the approved plans: he develops regional plans. It is he who is responsible for the programming and the realization of civil buildings of the state: in this area and immediately, his primary concern will be to design building plans avoiding dispersal resulting in unnecessarily high costs .

Also in collaboration with other ministries, it will construct neighborhoods in cities and major centers of the country to guide families with modest means looking to build decent housing thus avoiding slums.

As for Highways, Ministry of Public Works and Equipment must program the construction of roads and bridges throughout the country: it must have a technical counseling service for towns equip themselves routes to better serve their people. P explore the possibilities of creating a Road Fund could facilitate government support to municipalities for the creation of new roads and the maintenance of all the roads of national interest. The main roads have to be improved in view of the agreed program for national development: The relevant officials should begin as soon as possible negotiations with external agencies to find the necessary fund for the realization of this program. So with the steps we have just mentioned, namely:

Strengthening of Peace and National Security, accelerated and diversified development of agriculture policy to a more intense research and better use of our natural resources, development of tourism, general mobilization for harmonized development, freedom trade and free competition of political fair price and fair, improvement of social conditions (housing, employment and quality of work, progressive rwandisation in all areas and at all levels - equitable distribution of services of Public Health) adjustment methods governing the education of our youth, fiscal consolidation and management organizations with economic activity, increased more and more rational use of foreign financial aid and foreign private investment in foreign currency, open policy towards outside.

The Head of State, surrounded by a dynamic team and under the wise guidance of the Committee for Peace and National Unity, will work to achieve this policy, which seems more realistic for the moment.

If we have been long in our speech is that, on the occasion of the first direct contact, as Head of the Nation we must clarify our ideals and deep thoughts. But we would like to clarify that in the era of the Second Republic we start, there will be no room for sterile verbiage. The square is in the action.

