Your Excellencies the Ambassadors, Distinguished Business Officers, Representatives of International Organizations, Ladies and Gentlemen,

Let us start by thanking you for giving us the opportunity to fulfill a pleasant duty: one to transmit, to each individual, to all who are yours, to all who are dear to you, the Heads states and peoples you represent, the best wishes of happiness and prosperity for 1974 as we begin.

May this year be for you and all of yours, a year of joy and peace. This peace that we all want but can not be acquired without the personal commitment of each of us.

Your Excellencies the Ambassadors, Distinguished Business Officers, Representatives of International Organizations,

It is customary at the end of each year we review the salient events of national life. You all know what happened in our country during the year turns off 1973.

disorder movements have spread like wildfire in the entire national territory with the complicity of party cadres that we suspended. of jobs were lost, property looted, destroyed homes, lives sacrificed, especially in areas where the so-called leaders of this party were saying yet invested in the favor of the masses.

While innocent people knew undeserved fate, the national economy had engaged in an adventurous policy. often enormous credits were distributed in defiance of the rules of justice and equity. In some regions of projects whose technical studies have yet demonstrated the importance and social impact were removed or kept on hold. In other regions, projects with the futility and the excessive cost were clearly established, got priority and were, against all common sense, be executed. No prosecution was proposed against the perpetrators of embezzlement of public funds. And fear spare the favor of voters, they avoided the collection of taxes and duties.

Politically nepotism, favoritism and regionalism were the main criteria for the distribution of ministerial portfolios and allocation services of the public administration. Key posts were reserved for relatives and electoral clientele.

In the first six months of the year, the country was headed by a purely nominal government. A handful of politicians fed to incivility and intrigue, incapable of any conscience and any truly national responsibility, had undertaken to file the soul of the former leader. They had their man. Any presence suggestions from outside of this caste became suspicious and doubtful. It is within this shameful and narrow circle that will decide the national policy. It is in this framework that were developing, as in the upper echelons of the party, aberrant ideologies, ethnic and regional basis. It is within this caste was born and matured the idea of ​​dangerously weaken the national forces by the remoteness of some senior officers of the Army and the brutal suppression of the former National Police. This insane policy would find its completion in the physical liquidation of certain personalities followed by a massacre whose dark consequences are still shudder.

In total the former regime, by its decline, caused throughout the country a great upheaval in the political, economic, social and moral.

But 1973 is not only a year of unrest, lawlessness and incoherence. It is also and above all a year of re-entry and recovery of the country through the establishment of the Second Republic. In this sense it was a year of hope.

At dawn on July 5, 1973, we decided with the High Command of the Army, to take charge of the destiny of the country. It was then a cure for the measurement of pain without precedents that descended on the country in distress. In the calm and dignity, the National Forces have shown, once again, they could not fail in their law guardians mission, integrity and Country Unit.

What we wanted to achieve, you know, we have repeated on many occasions, that is peace and national concord.

If our action has taken place without any bloodshed, so calm observed throughout Rwanda reflects a general consent of the people of Rwanda to the historic act of July 5, 1973, we have said enough, Coup State of July 5, 1973 can make a socio-economic miracle. Diets have changed, but major problems remain: rapid population growth, the almost total ignorance as to what our basement and contains many other problems that rank our country among the less developed pauyres the globe.

What is our main hope and that the Committee for Peace and National Unity, the Government of the Second Republic and we even do not cease to preach to our countrymen is that every Rwandan to any level and any training becomes aware of individual responsibility and its role in the overall development of our country. The Rwanda will be developed by the sum of the efforts of his own son and daughters. This is what the action of the July 5, 1973 will result: an agreement hearts of all Rwandans and for all men, an individual commitment to work at maximum efficiency for the development of our country.

At the same time it was terminating the trials that plagued the country, the Second Republic has developed and defined the outlines of politique'nationale in all areas. Our fundamental options are contained in the messages of July and especially our keynote of the first August 1973. They were recalled several times. It would be superfluous to return. It is more appropriate to make a quick assessment of the first six months of the new regime.

Thanks to its strong political and realistic, Rwanda has, under the Second Republic, strengthened inside as outside.

The Government and the public administration are based in their composition, the principles established on 1 August 1973. The competence, professionalism, efficiency and equitable distribution of officials remains a major concern of our policy. We remain convinced that without the ability and energy of the great servants of the state the country can not progress.

On the local level, municipalities are now conceived as the basic cell development.

The National Security Forces, guarantor of order and public peace, continue to set an example of discipline, cohesion and dedication. The opening last October, the Superior Military School will provide an intellectual, moral and civic further and complete the elements required to support the latest senior managers of the Rwandan Army currently operating.

Regarding the maintenance of order within the previously entrusted to the former national police mission must be completed by the Gendarmerie whose creation has been decided. Recall that the Rwandan Armed Forces, instead of being a burden to the nation, must now contribute to the common development effort in the Civic Service for Youth and the execution of certain public works.

Long desired but stubbornly delayed, the Ministry of Justice is now up. The department responsible for various courts it allows for improving the organization and regular monitoring of our jurisdictions.

By covering their independence judges, partly renewed, are able to deliver justice by applying the laws, regulations and the principles of equity. The Supreme Court, whose work has been lightened, now has the opportunity to focus on an ongoing basis on matters before it. She has no reason to allege to justify the accumulation of records.

For six months the economic and social problems are at the forefront of activity and concerns of the Government.

The National Council for Economic Policy, serious and competent body, was set up as planned. Its mission is, as we know, to propose the outlines of economic policy, the priorities for the development of the country and to discuss the results. In his work, he is called to work closely with the Chamber of Commerce and Industry, especially regarding the progress of the private sector and promote employment.

The Government has also taken important steps to promote a realistic and effective policy of import and export, by completely revising the tariff. These actions embody the principles that should govern our trade with foreign countries. They will, we hope, to better ensure adequate supply of our country.

We suffer, for the moment, the effects of international conditions whose control mechanisms are difficult to detect. However, we are counting on the effort of each to make it easier for those responsible to feed the country including refraining from any act which might hinder their activity.

Also following the Second Republic since its inception a vigorous policy to rationalize our public finances. The 1973 budget has of course suffered the blows of events this year. The 1974 budget should better reflect the realities. The services responsible for studying ways to improve methods of verification and collection of taxes. At the same time an ad hoc committee examines measures to bring back, at the earliest, the Treasury funding to the various creditors.

It is inadmissible that some people still consider debts to public bodies such as free gifts.

Socially and morally, we think first of all that those who work should be able to live decently from the fruits of his labor. We can not accept in our country the exploitation of man by man.

Now a more reasonable minimum wage must be allocated to the laborer. The relevant departments are also studying the issue of the valuation of treatment of public officials. We remain firmly convinced that happiness can not be conceived in a State is not intended for all citizens.

Always socially and morally, the Government has adopted concrete measures to protect and safeguard the morality of the Rwandan youth. These measures are a first step in the fight against idleness and juvenile delinquency.

As regards information, the people directly involved in the recovery effort and progress of the country in all sectors. It is constantly informed of the efforts of the Government to fulfill its mission. Governments will surround more mysteries. The Committee for Peace and National Unity and the Government Council did not discuss the secret affairs. The main topics of current events are regularly broadcast by news organizations better kept.

In addition it was stated that the Government must go beyond the outdated single stage of the way information and remove artificial distances between Rulers and Ruled once. The tours organized in all prefectures in October and November, have enabled the nation to higher authorities to take fruitful contacts with the population and gave him the opportunity to put us in couran its projects, wishes and its major concerns.

The will and the spirit of clean opening to the second Republic does not stop at national borders. It is no longer enabled Rwanda to retreat into a sterile isolation. Also our efforts they tend, for six months, to be more open to the outside. Our country already handicapped by its limited resources and its geographical location, must improve its relations with African countries as well as with the nations of the world peace-loving and justice.

As expected, the Government began by renewing the ties of friendship and cooperation with neighboring countries.

In numerous contacts with officials of friendly countries, we repeated our willingness to partner with the struggle for international peace.

In its contacts, Rwanda was not limited to purely regional framework of tropical Africa. Our participation in the Algiers conference last September, reflecting the sustained interest that the Government bears the agreement and cooperation with the non-aligned countries. By breaking diplomatic relations with Israel, we wanted like all peace-loving countries to condemn unequivocally the expansionist aims of the Jewish state. The Rwanda remains firmly committed to the ideals of peace, freedom and justice contained in the UN Charters and LOUA. He did not hesitate to recognize the sister Republic of Guinea Bissau or to welcome with joy in the OAU. On behalf of the same ideals condemning Portuguese colonialism in Angola et.au Mozambique, illegal and racist regime in Rhodesia and apartheid in South Africa.

Your Excellencies the Ambassadors, Distinguished Business Officers, Representatives of International Organizations,

Thus Rwanda now manifests its presence in the concert of nations. We are now reopened to the world, including the African world, to the great family of non-aligned. We have simultaneously strengthened our old friendships. But you know the limits of our forces and our efforts. So we can take this opportunity to thank on behalf of all Rwandans, Governments and organizations that you represent for their support to our development. Several accomplishments fruits of your aids are visible throughout our national territory.

We also take this opportunity to ask your Excellencies to convey the feeling of our people for such aid be intensified and that all measures are taken to improve efficiency. For example, we should rule out cooperating that buries files in drawers and which to delay his departure, engaging in feats of strength to turn a one-year project in a project of nine. We do not want technicians who are advancing a project only if they collect bribes.

Members of the Diplomatic Corps, an important point is to emphasize in this area. For several years, aid was promised in Rwanda by some countries. Agreements have been signed; toasts were extensively worn those signatures. But years have passed and no project has emerged.

These unexplained delays have disappointed our expectations. Rwanda has given word's value. It is said that thing promised something due. We believe that these delays were holding to a situation that is no longer and that these promises will be executed now.

Comrades Members of the Peace Committee and National Unity, the President of the Supreme Court, Honorable Ministers, Rwanda and Rwandans

Let us hope especially that 1974 is coming to every Rwandan, a year of personal happiness. Whether for each family member a year of joy and understanding, be it for our country-a year of Peace, Unity and National Concord.

We appreciate your calm and wisdom and the warm welcome to our call of July 5, 1973. This is because, like us, you had enough intrigue and small divisive policies of those who were drowned in a bath blood.

Every morning throughout Rwanda, with the rise of the national colors, the army of our country welcomes your wisdom. You have heard our call for peace and national unity. calm prevails in our country, this calm that selfish wanted to disturb their personal ambitions. You supported the action of our Army. You we have witnessed in the first hours of our action. You we have repeated during our tours in ten prefectures of the country. Thank you for your enthusiastic reception. You know our immediate objectives:

reforming our education; the organization of our economy and our business operations; increasing our agricultural production; wellness further social.

But above all, what we seek is the consciousness of each of you and will to pursue his work. We want 1974 to be the year of a deeper conviction to rely primarily on our own efforts. Also we ask executives to show to all the people their example of efficiency.

If we condemn certain binding effects of cooperation, we can hold no escape for Rwandan officials. They must be convinced, more than any other citizen, their responsibilities in the development of our country. Their actions will be judged in the projects they will, each in his step, assured the success both in the preparation at the implementation stage. The coming year will see the start of implementation of educational reforms. But a special effort is also required to agriculture officials. We said RWANDA's economy still held for many years our agricultural production. The coming year should see increased our crops, especially those of exportable products (coffee, tea, vegetables, pyrethrum ...). We ask the leaders of agriculture to make the year 1974 a special loved for all measures to increase the production of exportable food products. The year 1974 was proclaimed year of farm work. Rwanda and Rwandans, only our efforts can get us out of our poverty and generate sympathy friends who help us. But our efforts must be coordinated, oriented, as do we attach great importance to the work of the Department of Planning and Natural Resources. The emergency operation in the general office of the department of studies and its effectiveness will guide our efforts toward a common goal of national development.

The most urgent for that office work is the adaptation of the project's five-year plan 1972-1976 with the guidelines in our keynote of 1 August 1973. A draft plan studied in a general atmosphere of intrigue, division, regionalism, claiming, in effect, a review, so that through the avalanche of his numbers, it is the concrete and that one adapts to the imposed line. What is important is to identify the most accurate way possible, the socio-economic problems facing the nation and to set priorities. So the problems can they be considered in light of the financial resources mobilized and human, exam practice will lead to the design of projects and development policy appropriate to resolve the identified problems as well.

In concrete terms, our plan must aim:

raising the rural purchasing power; the education reform so that it will lead to socio-economic development efforts; the significant increase in agricultural production.

It must aim:

the creation of non-farm employment; improving habitat, healthy cities and healthy national health; the establishment of a legal and effective safety device.

He should seek:

all measures removing the idleness of our great youth; and finally, the equitable sharing of goods from our joint efforts.

This can not become an excuse to stop ongoing projects or delay those whose funding has been found. We mean that in the inventory of new projects to be included, the plan must be inspired by our principles of the speech of 1 August 1973.

The projects and methods must be adapted to our population, rappclons it is 90% peasant.

Comrades Members of the Peace Committee and National Unity, the President of the Supreme Court, Honorable Ministers, Excellencies, Ambassadors, Distinguished Business Officers, Representatives of International Organizations, Ladies and Gentlemen, Rwandan and Rwandans

This is where all of our wishes that We make for the new year 1974. May it be a year of more joy in life, more cooperation for international justice, a year of work and more 'commitment. May it be a year of unity in action. Banish whatever proceeds hatred, dispersion, isolation, waste of energy.

The year 1974 special year for farm work, we wish the happy, full of happiness and peace which we all aspire.

