The passing year has marked a turning point in the history of Rwanda.

Without bloodshed and with minimum inconvenience, Your Excellency, with the collaboration of the Committee for Peace and National Unity has taken over the fate of the Rwandan people and established the Second Republic. Six months have not yet passed since its foundation, but already we can see the beneficial results of the new regime.

Today, on behalf of the diplomatic and consular corps accredited in the Republic of Rwanda and my own behalf, I have the honor to express my congratulations and best wishes for the complete success of your plans and projects for the good of people and the rise of the masses. These are wishes that we redouble in view of the new year, which we already glimpse the dawn. That the year 1974 brings a revival of spirits, strengthening energy, increased development efforts and progress and it marks a step forward for all Banyarwanda. This is our hope and our confidence. That all social classes, all the ethnic groups of the country collaborate generously and enthusiastically, and peace and national unity will be secured and unshakably established.

The states that we have the privilege to represent to Your Excellency see with deep interest the progress made by the Government and people of Rwanda. And you know that as far as possible; they cooperate with their technical support, their staff and their financial means. This program we have assisted with all our strength until now, we do not ask better than to keep it, to extend and improve dan a spirit of humanity, in collaboration fellowship with Your Excellency, your Ministers and the entire population. This is also one of the goals proposed in the preamble of the UN Charter: promoting economic and social progress of all peoples.

Gathered in front of your Excellency today we dedicate ourselves again to this high ideal and we express the sincere wish that the new year 1974 to be Your Excellency, for your wife, for your family, for all your staff for the Republic of Rwanda and her people a year of prgrès, prosperity and peace.

