Rwandans,

Day I May universally devoted festival for a happy occasion, we send each and every Rwandan to every Rwandan Our. Congratulations for the work that each provides development of our country and for all the efforts to maintain peace and national harmony.

your wisdom and your courage We work raising the standard of living of the Rwandan people, public and redoubled efforts to work were the months of existence of the 2nd Republic.

understood and retained the guidelines of the 2nd Republic gradually put into practice in national life both public and private. The national activity was maintained. Several new activities have been common, the basic unit of our development; the state employees; the struggle for the creation and in this area of ​​the gendarmerie ^ restructuring of the judiciary; the Rwandan youth to develop the consolidation effort and recovery and our trade with the emerging action for Economic Policy; the opening from the outside; the revival of tourism are all undertaken by the 2nd Republic. The always required. By doing so, you have been peace and progress of our country. We you while hoping that this carrier I. May the festival of more happiness and more joy. That el reflection and self-examination for this for our country.

valiant promoters of labor humanism celebrations of the First of May, the values ​​of work and the particular gained the right to universal consideration and have the respect due to them.

The 2nd Republic wanted to save the respect of labor values, reconquered by our revolution of 1959. Its leaders want to give the man, the Rwandan worker, the farmer in particular, love of work and freedom, the joy of life and courage to the future.

The main purpose of our activities is, as you know, the elevation of all the living standards especially in the areas of health, housing, savings, nutrition, clothing, s education and means of communication for all layers of the population. Our national reconstruction efforts must aim to create more opportunities for every resident of Rwanda to further improve their living conditions.

Also each and every Rwandan Rwandans should they seek to do their job properly and to exercise discipline, honesty and integrity to stay at the forefront of the completion of our Revolution. They have a duty to participate more in the economic and social development of their country and for the welfare of their families.

We ask each resident of Rwanda to continue its operations and to become aware of individual responsibility and its role in the overall development of our country, as we have repeatedly emphasized, Rwanda will be developed by the sum efforts of his own son and daughters. Agricultural, economic, trade, investment, we urge Rwandans to take the lead. Everyone must give according to their means and possibilities in the area where it is placed the maximum return for the family and social progress.

The economic and social problems remain at the forefront of government concerns. We know it would not work at their maximum effort and if they are not able to fully enjoy the product of their labor. That's why we wanted to quickly resolve the issue of the minimum wage for each worker and to upgrade the salaries of state employees. At present the relevant departments are studying the problem of a social security system that actually meets the needs, aspirations and legitimate rights of Rwandan worker. Because it needs to be a fair division of property from our joint efforts.

Our passage in all prefectures and Our visits of the main social and economic achievements in the various regions of the country have allowed us to understand the importance of the urgent problems facing the population. They showed us the effort of all of you in the struggle for subsistence. They unfortunately we have also put in touch with the many problems that hinder our development: the population explosion, unemployment, juvenile delinquency, and how limited resources of our country. But the struggle for development is a necessity. It allows us to ensure both our existence and human dignity.

It is true that it is in a demographic and economic background rather hostile that Rwanda must meet the needs of its people in terms of training and opportunities. We must, at the rate of the increase of our population, to create new jobs for young people to enable them to participate in the development process and to improve their standard of living. In this area, the needs of rural youth are of utmost importance because it must be able to continue to live and work in the country for many years. Indeed, several very constraining factors in employment still characterize our country, namely:

The rural exodus to cities that drains the most ambitious elements among rural youth. The youth of the Rwandan population with less than 20 years 55%. The impact on the youth of the conventional primary education incompletely educated while having leaves brings out in them aspirations difficult to meet.

In this area, it bears repeating that our governments must contribute to the young work in the countryside. We believe that this is the main solution against crime and banditry. And for this crime, we want to keep us to expand on the subject. We only want to warn those who are assigned to duty as a challenge to the institutions will of the 2nd Republic. Convinced that the peace is a basic vital to the development of our country, we will spare nothing for that peace to be ensured.

It is also necessary to adapt education more realistically to national conditions and requirements. This includes power bridge the gap between school and the requirements of practical life of most of our citizens. The proposed school reform must reflect this.

This reform is a necessity all the more imperative that young people with the aim of economic and social country. It is they who, as adults, will collect the fruits of the current efforts. They are also the main vehicles of development because it is through education and rational use of youth that a country can acquire new knowledge and skills required for the progress of the nation.

Some companies have in the past opposed manual and intellectual labor, the latter generally giving more prestige to the person exercising. Such a view seems not only backward but also unacceptable because it lacks realism. Indeed, it is on manual labor, especially on agricultural work based economy of our country. We would like to repeat, agriculture will long remain the essential basis of our economic system.

To draw attention of the entire Rwandan population this reality, we have declared the year 1974 year national agriculture and manual labor. We take this opportunity to thank and encourage all those who have understood ... attitude and have supported our action by booking themselves every week day to manual labor.

Recall that we wanted thereby combat the intellectual bourgeoisie and give value to any form physical work. And we believe that in any program, should give them awake were the first example to their countrymen. The square is now for action. And we ask earnestly calf, services of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock coordinate and guide the momentum so that we modernize our agriculture remained too long. Let them remember ever calling them that we launched the first of August 1973 that seek better with the introduction of modern farming methods, for erosion control, rational use and a rural development Plan.

To reach its full human meaning, the work to be a source of culture and passing a comprehensive family means and an access road to the property responsibility. Hence the need for every worker to improve performance and to develop knowledge.

The idea of ​​responsibility grows only insofar develops at the same time the feeling of solidarity we realize that our actions follow us and we do affect directly or indirectly the whole community.

Rwandans and Dear Compatriots workers

You are all responsible for the well-being and the Rwandan people. Take any action that might improve your working conditions and your standing in this perspective, the 2nd Republic can only encourage professional associations as defined Labor of 1967. These professional associations stain primarily to the study and defense ... economic interests of workers and employers.

You now know that Rwanda leads on the external front a human liberation action and cooperation between nations. We must combine your efforts with those of all the people who, throughout the world and especially in Africa and the Third World, are spent constantly to improve the fate of humanity. Your action is to contribute to building a more beautiful Rwanda, released low intrigues and maneuvers resolutely committed to improving its development stage.

None of your steps and your daily activities ... ^ desserve understanding and the spirit of cooperation that should exist between Rwanda and other nations of the world.

Stretch your energies toward the common goal is the rapid development of the whole nation. May this day convinces us more than it is primarily through our own efforts, through our work we can overcome difficulties and ensure our families and our country's prosperity and progress to which we aspire.

LONG LIVE THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA LIVE WORK AND WORKERS.

