Rwandans,

This day of May 1, universally consecrated Labor Day, is for us a welcome opportunity to send every worker, every Rwandan and every Rwandan Our thanks and our congratulations for the work that each provides for the development of our country and all efforts for the maintenance of peace and national harmony.

With your calm, your wisdom and your courage We strongly working to raising the standard of living of the people of Rwanda. Public tranquility and a redoubled effort at work were the sign of the 10 months of existence of the 2nd Republic.

You understand and remember the directives of the 2nd Republic, you gradually put into practice in different sectors of the public both domestic and private life. The continuity of national activity was maintained. In several areas of new activities were undertaken: the common restructuring, based on our cell development; boosting the performance of public officials; the fight poui public peace and creating in this area of ​​the National Gendarmerie; the restructuring of the judiciary; the general mobilization of the Rwandan youth to the development of our country; the consolidation effort and recovery of our public finances and trade, thanks to the action of nascent National Council for Economic Policy; the opening of our country to the outside; the revival of tourism, are all activities dynamic enterprises by the 2nd Republic. The peace has always been required. By doing this you have been artisans of peace and progress of our country. We sincerely welcome you while hoping that this celebration of May 1 for either carrier you more happiness and more joy. May it be a day of reflection and examination of conscience for what we have done for our country.

Thanks to the valiant work of humanism developers who originally celebrations of May 1, the values ​​of work and manual labor in particular have acquired the right to universal consideration and have the respect due to them.

The 2nd Republic wanted to save the respect of labor values, reconquered by our social revolution of 1959. Its leaders want to give the man, the Rwandan worker, the farmer in particular, love of work and freedom the happiness and courage to the future.

The main purpose of our activities is, as you know, the elevation of all the living standards especially in the areas of health, housing, savings, nutrition, clothing, s education and means of communication for all layers of the population. Our national reconstruction efforts must aim to create more opportunities for every resident of Rwanda to further improve their living conditions.

Also each and every Rwandan Rwandans they must strive to do their job properly and be: discipline, honesty and integrity to stay at the forefront of the completion of our Revolution. They have a duty to participate more in the economic and social development of their country and for the welfare of their families.

We ask each resident of Rwanda to continue its operations and to become aware of individual responsibility and its role in the overall development of our country. As we have repeatedly stressed, Rwanda will be developed by the sum of the efforts of his own son and daughters.

Agricultural, economic, trade, investment, we urge Rwandans to take the lead. 11 Everyone must give according to his means and possibilities in the area where it is placed, the maximum return for the family and social progress.

The economic and social problems remain at the forefront of government concerns. We know it would be illusory to talk about the economy and social welfare if people do not give their maximum effort at work and if they are not able to fully enjoy the product of their labor. That's why we wanted to quickly resolve the issue of the minimum wage for each worker and to upgrade the salaries of state employees. At present the relevant departments are studying the problem of a social security system that actually meets the needs, aspirations and legitimate rights of Rwandan worker. Because it needs to be a fair division of property from our joint efforts.

Our passage in all prefectures and Our visits of the main social and economic achievements in the various regions of the country have allowed us to understand the importance of the urgent problems facing the population. She showed us the effort of all of you in the struggle for subsistence. They unfortunately we have also put in touch with the many problems that hinder our development: the population explosion, unemployment, juvenile delinquency, and how limited resources of our country. But the struggle for development is a necessity. It allows us to ensure both our existence and human dignity.

It is true that it is in a demographic and economic background rather hostile that Rwanda must meet the needs of its people in terms of training and opportunities. We must, at the rate of the increase of our population, to create new jobs for young people to enable them to participate in the development process and to improve their standard of living. In this area, the needs of rural youth are of utmost importance because it is necessary that it can continue to live and work in the country for many years. Indeed several very constraining factors in employment still characterize our country, namely:

The rural exodus to cities that drains the most ambitious elements among rural youth. The youth of the Rwandan population with less than 20 years is 55. The impact on young primary formal education which incompletely educated while having leaves brings out in them aspirations difficult to meet.

In this area, it bears repeating that our government must help to make work the young in the countryside. We believe that this is the main solution against crime and banditry. And for this crime, we want to keep us to expand on the subject. We only want to warn those who are assigned as duty to challenge the institutions of the 2nd Republic. Convinced that the peace is a basic vital to the development of our country, we will spare nothing for that peace to be ensured.

It is also necessary to adapt education more realistic conditions and nationales.-This includes power bridge the gap between school demands and requirements of practical life of most of our citizens. The proposed school reform must reflect this.

This reform is a necessity all the more imperative that young people are the goal of economic development and the country's social. It is they who, as adults, will collect the fruits of the current efforts. They are also the main vehicles of development because it is through education and rational use of youth that a country can acquire new knowledge and skills required for the progress of the nation.

Some companies have in the past opposed manual and intellectual labor, the latter generally giving more prestige to the person exercising. Such a view seems not only backward but also unacceptable because it lacks realism. Indeed, it is on manual labor, especially on agricultural work based economy of our country. We would like to repeat, agriculture will long remain the essential basis of our economic system.

To draw attention of the entire Rwandan population on this reality, we have declared the 1974 National Year of agriculture and manual labor. We take this opportunity to thank and encourage all those who have understood our attitude and have supported our action by booking themselves every week day to manual labor.

Recall that we wanted and there combat this form of intellectual bourgeoisie and give value to any form of physical labor. And we believe that in all more alert program must provide, first, an example to their countrymen. The square is now for action. And we ask again, insistently, the services of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock to coordinate and guide the momentum so that we serve to modernize our agriculture remained too long archaic. He remember ever calling them that we launched on 1 August 1973, the search for a better productivity with the introduction of modern farming methods, measures of erosion control, rational use and implementation of a rural development plan.

To reach its full human meaning, the work must be a source of culture and transcendence, a way to complete family development and an access road to the property and responsibility. Hence the need for each worker to seek to improve their performance and develop job skills.

The idea of ​​responsibility grows only insofar solidarity feeling simultaneously develops whereby we realize that our actions follow us and everything we do affect directly or indirectly the good of the whole community.

Rwandan workers, Dear Compatriots,

You are all responsible for the well-being and the future of the Rwandan people. Take any action that might help you improve your working conditions and your standard of living. In this perspective the 2nd Republic can only encourage the birth of professional associations as defined by the law of Labor 1967. These professional associations will focus primarily on the study and the defense of social and economic interests of workers and employers.

Rwandans,

You now know that Rwanda leads domestically continuous socio-economic development and action on the external front a human liberation action and cooperation between nations. We must combine your efforts with those of all the people who, throughout the world and especially in Africa and elsewhere in the Third World are spent constantly to improve the fate of humanity. Your action is to contribute to building a more beautiful Rwanda, released low maneuvers of intrigue and hatred resolutely committed to improving its development stage.

Your action and none of your daily activities already serves the agreement and the spirit of cooperation that must exist on the one hand, between different ethnic and social groups of our country and, secondly, between the Rwanda and other nations.

Stretch your energies toward the common goal is the rapid development of the whole nation. May this day convinces us more than it is primarily through our own efforts, through our work we can overcome difficulties and ensure our families and our country's prosperity and progress to which we aspire.

LONG LIVE THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA, LIVE WORK AND WORKERS.

