Comrades Members poui Committee for Peace and National Unity, the President of the Supreme Court, Honorable Ministers, Excellencies, Ambassadors, Ladies and Gentlemen,

In this nice day of July 1 we are gathered to celebrate with joy the 12th anniversary of independence of our country.

There are, indeed, exactly 12 years Rwanda recouviait full freedom by accessing the national and international sovereignty. Since then he returned to his son and daughters to take over its destiny.

There is no need to dwell at length on the meaning and requirements of independence or draw today comprehensive review of government action since 1 July last year. Suffice it to recall briefly what it means for the people of Rwanda independence of our country and the great turning points in recent history.

By the end of 1959 revolution, RWANDA definitively rejected any form of power focused on domination and exploitation of part of the population by another.

By accessing the independence Rwanda has grown to become the country masters of their destiny and took place in the concert of nations. On this occasion the people of Rwanda has freely with a political system and national institutions capable of ensuring its full potential.

This decisive choice of our institutions means that the independence of RWANDA would benefit all its son and daughters in all sectors of national life. Civil liberties enshrined in our constitution should allow everyone to have oneself freely and to work for the integral development of the nation. The Rwandan people had entirely the inalienable right to improve its economic and social situation and to participate in the benefits of its culture and its work.

It is my duty to say that this desire to benefit the entire population of the gains of our revolution of 1959 and the benefits of independence prevailed in the early years of the revolution. But you also know that gradually the then leaders lost sight of their core mission and responsibilities to the whole nation.

Is it necessary to recall the divisions, hatreds, persecutions, ostracism that prevailed in recent years in the party that we suspended? That ignores the politics of ethnic and regional discrimination artfully practiced hypocritically and methods developed to spread insecurity and terror in the country? Should we list the persons who during the first 6 months of 1973, have been unfairly stripped of their property or families who tragically lost some of their members? You know, and future generations will learn with horror, the machinations orchestrated to destroy, in early July 1973 of those guilty of emerged in some parts of the country.

In deciding to take power on July 5, the High Command of the Rwandan Army was narrowly saved the integrity of the national territory and restored the wording of the citizens. By this he restored the benefits of our revolution and our national independence.

Since July 5, common sense, efficiency, initiative resumed their rights. Since that memorable day was introduced a system concerned with maintaining national unity dangerously compromised, to preserve peace and order, to gather all the forces of the country around a common ideal, namely national development.

But the Second Republic was not only contented to clean the internal situation. She also restore first understanding and cooperation with our neighbors. For the constant participation of its representatives in various international meetings it is today alongside the other nations of the world peace-loving and freedom. This means that for the current Rwanda's international sovereignty is not an empty word.

But the real meaning of independence of a country must not be diverted by too flattering and too easy considerations. The independence of our country does not mean total abandonment to inaction. It implies instead that we are now fully in control of our destiny and our own development. This implies that every Rwandan should spend entirely for the survival of the nation of Rwanda. Poui be fully independent, we must further develop our country in all sectors. It is to this difficult but noble than how dedicated the last year the countries in close collaboration with the authorities of the entire population.

In all areas and in all regions of -the economic and social development projects Countries are encouraged and monitored in their implementation. Report crops such as coffee, tea, pyrethrum, cinchona, are the subject of a major campaign.

In this year declared agriculture, manual labor, once viewed with disdain, is about to find his rehabilitation. It is necessary that this activity which sustains nearly all of the Rwandan people regain full dignity and full value.

It is therefore first and foremost to the people of Rwanda to build and develop RWANDA. All of us must, in its place, and according to his ability to concentrate unreservedly to the work of national development.

We have already said that the rich countries of the world will understand that true friendship and true human solidarity urge them to help us in the projects that we have not been able to complete ourselves.

You know that black economic and social action takes place in a global economy particularly hard, mainly because of the energy crisis and the international monetary system. We asked our compatriots to refrain from any action likely to complicate the task of those charged with supplying the country. We urge the relevant authorities to discourage people who want to fish in troubled waters or to get the most advantage of the current crisis in the world.

For everyone to participate unhindered in the country's development work and for it to be able to dispose of the fruits of his labor, it is necessary that order and public safety are effectively ensured. The government and security forces must fight energetically all subversive activities and the scourge of banditry. We recall, once again, to those who still seek the peace that the penalties prescribed by law in this area will be strictly enforced.

Comrades Members of the Peace Committee and National Unity, the President of the Supreme Court, Honorable Ministers, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

If today we are proud to celebrate the joy our independence is that we have, together, save the meaning and dignity.

The achievements of this independence must always be kept and fructifies. This can only be done through your wisdom, your discipline and your work. We frankly cooperate with other nations.

But it is you, it is for us to jealously defend our independence. It is in these conditions that Rwanda, free and proud of themselves, will contribute to building a better world.

LONG LIVE THE REPUBLIC OF RWANDA, LONG LIVE THE PEOPLE OF RWANDA.

