Rwandans,

The July 5 is now registered in golden letters in the annals of the Republic of Rwanda. Day of Peace, Unity and National Concorde, on 5 July each year now remind us of the historic act of the High Command of the Rwandan Army. heroic act performed in all wisdom and dignity but also in the fierce determination to avert the danger that a shameless politicking was hovering over the nation.

So we can congratulate ourselves today rightly have, not one, crossed the abyss into which we were all going to be rushed if we had paid a willing ear to the machinations that hatched in the halls. The morning of that day, when you have learned, by the antennas of the National Radio, the High Command of the decision of the Rwandan Army, hearts are asleep. You applauded, cheered this initiative. Y still was there that would hesitate to the first announcement of salvation! Thus ended a reign of terror overheated by an orchestrated propaganda of all evil instruments of hate and division between people, ethnic groups and regions.

The evening of July 5, you could make a soupit relief. Without taking you without you deliver to the instincts of revenge, with your wisdom and your usual calm, you have conscientiously obeyed the High Command of the Rwandan Army set. Again your managers can only encourage you, thank you, and themselves, welcome to be with you as guides and counselors.

We see, now, thanks to your support that, by common action, we renovated our internal structures, a necessary condition for peace, unity and national harmony. We cleaned our neighborly relations with the sister Nations that surround us and the outside world in general. We finally rehabilitated manual labor, agriculture in particular, which requires our attention in terms of development.

As you know. We have also developed enough, the Party that we abolished became the instrument of obscure maneuvers. It is through him that transited any measure pressure, extortion and unfortunate combinations. It was not the torchbearer of democracy in fl had instead become the bottleneck.

The administrative apparatus had, around the former Head of State, turned into a "court" populated by intriguing courtiers, eager for promotions and privileges as guaranteed nor their intellectual capacity, nor their personal merits.

The appareil législatif, normalement censé be voix du peuple, s sensiblement mué in a special kind of class are the main preoccupation consistait en la défense et au maintien des "fiefs" électoraux here, au nom du Parti, devaient purement et simplement devenir properties privées des députés. Une telle situation bloquait tout appareil administratif bolsa échelons: ministéritl, préfectoral and communal. Vous savez que les-Ministres, prefects les, les Députés, Bourgmestres les, les conseillers communaux, passaient leur temps à leur préparer countryside, in the terrain for aménager le prochain drive. Dès lors s'accumulaient les dossiers, les doléances étaient classées sans suite or in the disparaissaient enchevêtrement des relations électorales.

The confusion was much more widespread at lower levels of the central government. The virus had infected the political administrative apparatus: indiscipline, corruption, racketeering, denunciation, extortion, paralyzing services both public and private.

Disorder reigned in the management of public finances. Recovery of loans to the Treasury, the collection of taxes and all treasury operations left much to be desired, misappropriation of public funds had entered the customs of the central government. The national economy, as we have repeatedly pointed out, never was the subject of serious study starting from the country real data. The distribution of funds was based solely on the origin of the people, not the priorities of the national development plan. The trade had been disrupted by thoughtless actions have forced foreigners to leave the country hurriedly and private at the same time him on the international market, suppliers of basic materials.

As for foreign policy, isolation, camouflage, mistrust, became the golden rule of diplomacy still. Our representation abroad, you know enough the composition and terms of selection. Only prevailed unnecessary baffles with neighboring countries.

Clarification is probably needed on the contribution of the advent of the Second Republic, the record of his great achievements and new directions.

With July 5, 1973, we first wanted to bring our country a new era, an era of peace, unity and national concord. We wanted to ensure national unity and continuity when the nation would run the danger of complete disintegration. This is the guarantee of the legitimacy of our action.

To achieve the first objective we had to first take irrevocable steps vis-à-vis the political activities of the Party, the government team and the National Assembly without, so far, no one is worried, except of course those with irrefutable facts showed their complete compromise. It was important to avoid the public vengeance before a special court has ruled definitively on their particular circumstances. The Committee for Peace and National Unity deployed his forces so that no drop of blood being shed in the country, no adventurer dares, in this moment, to preach wherever ideas contrary to those our national recovery company. Once peace and calm restored, our first concern was to place us before the imperative necessities of the Nation, to design and implement a capable administrative apparatus to direct, guide, and coordinate with wisdom and efficiency, the various public affairs management bodies.

Our Keynote Address lor of August 1973 shows enough that we left determined to be in perfect agreement with major national options of our social revolution. We want progress for and by the people. We are aware that our government can succeed if it is placed outside of this reality. The effectiveness and ambition of our development policy are combined with the strength and hope of our economy, which is focused on agriculture. Why we proclaimed the first year of our exercise of power "agricultural year".

Although this year, precisely, a transition period and programming, many measures and regulations have been taken and immediately implemented to meet the imperatives of national recovery. Overall the results are very significant.

For example: The Public Service successfully fought and still fighting hard against "administrative inertia." It incorporates in its managers promising new elements which, increasingly, take over from those who refuse to exercise. The status of state employees and the organizational setting their powers have finally emerged. We know with what nonchalance we had lying around in drawers. The Armed Forces are making a comeback discipline and training that the best guarantee is the creation of the Higher Military School. The mobilization of the population for its direct participation in the development, knows success. All Ministries and Services getting people got down eagerly to this primary task of development. Government departments organize effectively in all prefectures, seminars for officials responsible for carrying execution guidelines of this mobilization. The Department of Public Health and Social Affairs has intensified its activities especially regarding the broadcast programs to mass education. The minimum wage for workers was set according to the standards imposed by the current economic climate.

Sports have restarted, this time with promises that leave hope to participate in the near future, to any international sports organization.

The National Education, an area that had experienced severe disruptions in its operation has stabilized. Schools know the calm and discipline necessary for normal continuation of studies. She vigorously embarked on a general overhaul of the programs of all the teaching. The our country's education reform project envisages the best way to deliver the Rwandan youth education more adapted to national realities.

In all other sectors of national activity programs exist reform and restructuring. Commune Restructuring is an ongoing concern of the Ministry of the Interior and the Civil Service. The basic standards in this field have already been laid. More detailed guidelines will appear shortly.

The National Development Plan examines updating a master plan including programs to short and long terms. More realistic, the plan intends to locate projects where they are most cost effective.

Elsewhere, as our visits to major development hubs we have sufficiently demonstrated, there is intense activity which wants to be in tune with the dynamics of the Second Republic. We believe there is cause for optimism and hope for a better future for all citizens of the Republic.

As for foreign policy, the doors were opened to international friendship and cooperation. Our wishes and desires, in this area, were accompanied by success. once the conflict with some of our neighbors, fed by undigested our former leaders suspicions, finally settled. We would not dwell on the facts and diplomatic gestures of the Second Republic. You could follow by the antennas of our National Radio the many trips we made abroad.

Our delegations abroad to undertake a determined policy of opening up our country. Our policy has enabled us to expand the circle of cooperation. We want to be everywhere that agitate the global issues wherever engages the debate on the problems of the Third World.

Following the advent of the Second Republic, we proposed reviving the Tripartite group which Rwanda, Zaire and Burundi in an association of sovereign states concerned about maintaining socio-economic links and historical cultural . We know that this association, rich promises, had seriously suffered from sensibilities shady former leaders.

Several African countries have with ours cooperative relations which are based mainly on regional projects opportunities. Let us say in passing those issued some criticism in this area that wisdom recommended to avoid taking positions that could worsen situations we all want to avoid.

As for other friendly countries, outside Africa, we maintain the level of cooperation to a viable temperature. The renewal of the cooperation projects with Belgium, France, West Germany, Switzerland, Canada, is completed. That, very briefly outlined the balance of our domestic and foreign policy activities during this short transition period. Transition, in fact, the nebula situation we have inherited do we let the choice of stopgap: restore peace and national unity seriously compromised and put the people to work. Taking into account these few results at the height of bad turn in the political-economic situation, we can say that this report is largely positive. In some ways, it exceeds even our expectations.

However, it must be admitted, we are still at the threshold of the General Program you exposed by our statement of 1 August 1973. The tasks incumbent upon our government assumed an organized work all the administrative apparatus. Public Service will have to create conditions for a more rational organization of this unit to reduce its cost including ejection unable elements and the gradual awareness of those who are determined to support their national recovery efforts. It must judiciously root out favoritism remains that still hinder its full capacity.

The selection and distribution of frames we impose a policy which should aim to combine the work of former executives, the maximum use of their experience and knowledge with the promotion of young promising elements. We want a work environment that would allow officials to assert their capabilities further. Our Government would like to see developed among officials such quality that the sense of the new. We said that initiatives should be encouraged and straightened errors. Have a sense of the new, vital quality for our frames, lets see a development perspective, to anticipate the future, to find the best way to resolve problems that arise. Nowadays, where the rapid and profound changes taking place in social life and in production, this quality becomes particularly important.

We know the problems relating to management, his failure, his training abroad, outside the national realities. We reiterate our recommendation to the agents of the Public Ministry and Justice. We demand them of wisdom first, speed later in the review and enforcement of judgments. It is inconceivable that in a country like ours, where everyone is sensitized for peace and national unity, litigants, the cause of which is held by the courts, should be exploited to cause subtle arrangements.

Promoting the health of people is one of the conditions of the rationale for the government. We want to give new meaning to the general mobilization of the population for its effective participation in development.

Rwandans,

Policy you will agree with us that we must first eliminating from hearts outbreaks of hatred and intrigue before restarting any electoral process. It must first be a peace time, harmony, recovery of the value of work. We felt this time to a period of five years, dated the day of the historic decision of the High Command of the Rwandan Army. And during this time experts have gathered all directions, all your aspirations in a manifesto that the basis for a gathering of party people of Rwanda.

Some may cry to dictatorship. Let them know that we abhor more they can do. And if the situation of Our country requires a strong power, the basic principles of a healthy democracy must be safeguarded.

Promoting small and medium enterprises must be a permanent concern of our technical development services. Cooperative associations or any form of movement towards the organization of socio-economic groups are of particular importance. We will continue to encourage or promote them.

In our policy we must always consider the interests of social groups that are youth and women in Rwanda.

The Government grants and always pay special attention to the problems and concerns of youth. Young people under 20 make up more than half the population of our country. This is our future.

Unfortunately many young people begin or have already begun to use violence. Banditry, condemned by public opinion, as it was recalled again, must be fought by the rigor of the law as much as by the implementation of social legislation allowing each to evolve according to their abilities and possibilities adaptation.

The object of our development policy is to get that Rwandan women have new opportunities both to raise children, to participate more in social, leisure and studies, to learn more fully with our national values.

The management of public finances requires the government a reaffirmation of principles to ensure the return of all state revenue. We can no longer tolerate the misuse public funds or dice endless debt to the Treasury. The public credit institutions should not be regarded as charitable institutions in charge of distributing gifts to a few privileged individuals.

On this issue, already on 1 August 1973 We had said that the lending agencies ensure the recovery of credits granted.

The Committee for Peace and National Unity has made several appeals to the public debt owed to comply with the provisions of contracts to which they freely entered. Relevant government services have renewed this call.

We rent debtors who heard and obeyed our call and have regularized their situation.

Many, however, continue to tune and take these loans for their gifts generously offered. The Government must take responsibility to recover his property. Thus. We ask again to the Ministry of Finance and Economy, as well as the Department of Justice to implement all the harsh laws to correct the recalcitrant.

As for debts owed to public utilities, the first measure is the seizure of buildings, means of transport, other materials have been acquired by defaulted loans despite the requirements of the contracts. Similarly be seized buildings and means of transport equivalent to the amounts due to service tax. These goods therefore belong to the state from that day. The services rigorously apply this decision. The country can not refuse financing due to handle development projects uncivil unable even to be grateful to the organizations who have given their individual favors. Note that the total amount of these liabilities amounted on this date to a half billion Rwandan francs. We also ask the Ministry to take all measures fiercely to install in our country economy and a healthy trade. It is done more effectively help by the National Council for Economic Policy that we created for this purpose.

But in economic matters, we inherited a past miserable and difficult.

We must rethink and redefine the promotion of cooperatives popular savings and loans. The past has shown to us the futility of companies allocations to population, the profiteers of the system still being affluent people and not the common people.

In terms of national education, the most immediate goal is that school reform that the draft was prepared by the Ministry of Education. This draft is being corrected, taking into account the criticisms received before being submitted to the Council of Government. Recall that on school reform, the principle of gold is that every level of the educational cycle we need to train responsible citizens called to participate in the joint development effort.

This educational reform is also a first phase of a more profound revolution of our company. Changes are needed, for example in the design of plans and groups habitat Rwandans. We need groups better meet the common benefits: health centers, transport, social centers ... As we no longer consider work as a taxable chore only to subordinates, national development is a required duty of everyone, the worker as the boss, the Minister as executive officers, businessmen like the farmer and the field, the higher, the more awake, should serve as an example to the smallest. Let no one believes therefore exempt from the general effort. We have crazy make a strenuous effort for the survival of our country.

The current theme is cooperation. The experience gives us reason not only to think but still observe daily that the development of a country depends to a large extent of popular contribution. We must rely on our own strength. Mobilizing the masses for the Rwandan development is the essence of our goals.

The imperatives of development does not just engage the public services, but also the private sector. This must be convinced of the need for collaboration. It is not normal that some private agencies apply to consider or to give the idea of ​​being regarded as a state within a state.

We encourage all forms of associations, companies, private initiatives as long as they work in the sense of well-being of our people. coordination of concern in this area requires us to intervene in the private sector to establish the link between the ordinary competition of non-government services and the national development program.

Recall also in this regard that in terms of investment remain convinced that the effort national is essential. The Rwanda will be built by Rwandans. So we must go beyond jealousy and suspicion to invest in Rwanda, in the integrity and honesty, our meager assets.

You know that the court martial set up to try the troublemakers who have devastated our country in the first months of 1973 has served on Ruhengeri from 13 to 29 June. It examined the investigations made since July 1973.

She served from June 13 to 29, 73 and gave the much needed time to each accused so that he can present his defense. The sessions of this Court were public. You've heard the weakness of their defense and have witnessed the shame has covered these unpatriotic when they were put in front of their crimes.

You know the decision of the Court Martial, decision delivered on June 29, 1974. Kayibanda whose instigation the beginning of unrest 73 and intended to kill were proved, and 7 of these senior advisers, organizers of the unrest and killings were sentenced to death.

Rwandans,

We wanted to make this day an occasion for reflection and action. Reflecting on the circumstances and motivation of the act that the High Command of the Rwandan Army has had to ask. Thinking about the total disintegration of the country that a nameless faceless policy had favored and widespread in all strata of the nation. Thinking about the enthusiastic response and spontaneous that each and every one of you has reserved for our call.

We wanted it to be a day of reconciliation. Therefore, on this day of the National Peace, we decided to commute the death sentences imposed by the court martial on 29 June, on pain of imprisonment.

This day should be a day of action. We want now, on 5 July each year on a day-ups. A day where, worker, farmer, banker, official says, facing himself and to the nation, the result of his efforts. We want that this day is finally the opportunity for all Rwandans to meet, to unite more and engage, unanimous for the development of their country in the Peace and National Concord.

