Rwandan People,

Yesterday you learned the important decisions taken by the Command of the National Guard to save the country from rotten mess that would degenerate into disaster. The National Guard, which has always assured your peace, guard the sacred duty to protect the peace and national unity.

The policy in this country, was more concerned with peace. Uncivil elements abused the fatigue of one the nation had chosen for the lead and led him to forget the meaning of National Unity. But fortunately for our country, this clique of criminals is not large. I invite you all, citizen, citizens, to disagree with his accomplices.

The National Guard intervened when the country was going to be thrown into the abyss. She comes to save peace. This peace that we want sustainable and bring progress in national development. You all have the duty to work for the restoration of peace and national unity. It is for your interest, it's for the good of your family, it is for the prosperity of the whole nation. Love your fellow countrymen regardless of ethnic or regional origin distinction. Cast all propaganda regionalist. Report to the authorities anyone who wants to push to work against national unity.

Follow the advice and instructions you give the Committee for Peace and National Unity. It knows you particularly appreciate the calm that you have kept and still keep in the early hours of the new direction of our country. This calm is further evidence of the trust and support of your National Guard. Every morning upon the exercise of the national colors, the National Guard will salute your wisdom. Communal authorities, collaborate closely with the new prefectural authorities. Beware of those who may try to confuse you to compromise yourself. Officials and agents of the State, assume your responsibilities with zeal and dedication. The country, which keeps you, needs you. Work in peace to your families and your country. As for the politicians who have just been tabled by our decision, we repeat that they have to worry about anything as long as they obey our instruction: to momentarily leave the political activities and devote himself fully the development of our country, according to the new direction that we trace them. All you foreigners of good will quietly stay at your occupations. We ask you to really help the development of the country. As already reported in our press release, we will maintain good relations with all countries neighboring First, the OAU member countries and then finally with all countries who campaign for freedom and international peace, especially those with which people decided to establish diplomatic relations. Special thanks to the countries that have already shown their support following the decision we made. We respect all agreements and treaties with foreign countries and international organizations.

As for you especially, citizens, members of the National Guard, the nation is proud of you. You come once more to save from destruction. Separatist elements tried in vain to divide you. You have repulsed them; because your role is not to create divisions in the country, you are the same National Unity.

The act together we just ask the sufficient proof. We have full hope that the Rwandan people entirely follow this example of cohesion. You are all among the best children of our beloved country; be proud to be in the unit.

In those rare individuals who preach division, answer "NO" as usual. What interest there he has to divide our country. Is it not through your unit you have always been the pride and hope of the nation?

Redouble your commitment to your country, your leaders and all your compatriots, without exception. Continue to ensure the tranquility of your fellow citizens; collaborate with them against anything that may undermine the Peace and National Unity. Your country, you love, you will be grateful.

Long live the Republic of Rwanda! Long live the Rwandan people!

