Excellencies, Members of the Diplomatic Corps,

It is customary at the beginning of each year the ceremonies of the kind that brings us together today reflect the feelings of vows to the head of the country.

These feelings, you just express through your Dean, our respect towards our family and with regard to all Rwandans.

In turn, it's good heart we express to each of you, each member of your family our best wishes for a happy year full of joy and success.

We also pray each of your Excellencies to transmit to the Heads of State that you represent, and through them, to your respective peoples, our prosperity and peace vows. May the year 1975, we start to be for each of your Heads of State, a year of health and happiness, a year of personal satisfaction. Whether your people for a year of peace and prosperity.

During a similar ceremony, we said at the beginning of 1974, already passed, "make this year for you and all yours a year of joy and peace. This peace that we all want, but can be acquired without the commitment of each of us. "

But we express that the wishes and desires. We are not master of history. However, we can congratulate ourselves because this joy and peace, we have benefited despite some disappointments that are part of every human life.

Disappointment in effect since 1974 has been, worldwide, a year of tension. Tension in the Middle East where, every day, a new war was considered inevitable. The beloved 1974 when the global economy dwindled in a situation that shook even the superpowers once regarded as invulnerable. 1974, year of hunger and suffering, years of drought and thirst: India, Bangladesh, Sahel. Who really knows how many died?

Disappointment with us also when the year 1974 proclaimed year of farming effort call followed by all our compatriots, paradoxically ends with our call to the international generosity to rescue our people without food.

But 1974 was also a year of peace - year of political change in Portugal year of hope for our brothers in Southern Africa after so many past decades in the bush to bring to reason a selfish minority and immoral - year the turpitude of South Africa with their leaders appartheid was laid bare year of peace and joy at home where despite all the problems that are struggling against our development, each of us, every Rwandan is aware of individual criminal responsibility in national development. The Rwanda will be developed by the sum of the efforts of his own son and daughters.

Comrades members of the Committee for Peace and National Unity, the President of the Supreme Court, Ministers. Rwandans,

It is normal that at the beginning of this year, we adressions vows specific to each of you and to all who are dear to you. That the coming year is for us all. Rwanda, a year of more joy, more peace and more consistent national.

Set for 1975: "RAISED OUR PRODUCTION." This is the slogan that calls us to work and which requires an extra effort to every Rwandan. The outline traced oans Our keynote of 1 August 1973 indicate to every Rwandan, every worker, every manager, the means to achieve greater production tine. However, we would like that this year, 1975, each specifically on the appearance department insists that enables him better to meet this target.

Produce more strengthening our Peace and National Concord Policy. Thank you without fighting the followers of hate and false rumors, remains of a political intrigue and discord long maintained by the enemies of peace. Fight inaction that some agents want to bring in our Civil Service. Encourage production by supporting the initiative and individual performance. Encourage regional symbiosis.

The solid foundation that we come together to give the Commune, the basic unit of our national development, must be exploited. These bases will be completed in the coming years by creating a NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL, body that will replace the conventional type Parliament unsuited to our realities.

To our comrades in arms, members at any level of our Armed Forces, we reiterate our encouragement in their mission to guarantee peace and public tranquility for every Rwandan. Model of national harmony, our Armed Forces have primary mission for which they must be ready at any moment to defend our country. The secondary mission you assigned is, as you know, your participation in education and mobilization of the great Rwandan youth. You know your service and that of your equipment is expensive to the state. Lighten these expenditures by devoting yourself outside of your workouts for the defense of territory, production work.

Produce more by rational and effective mobilization of our great youth. Recall here that we have not created a Ministry of Sports and Recreation, but have significantly established the Ministry of Youth, responsible for "program and achieve the integration of the Rwandan youth in the national development" .

We insisted in the sector of civic education of youth, on the preparation of his working life, life that, for most, is carried in the rural areas. We must therefore mobilize the youth intensively, force him to make a substantial contribution to the community, to revolutionize the rural areas for increased production.

And this mobilization, taking place primarily within the population in the town, development unit must avoid at all costs new patterns of immigration to the city. The tangible results achieved in the field of sports and folklore of the Department of Youth should therefore not distract him from his primary mission: mobilizing youth for production.

Rwandans,

Our country counted among the poorest of the underdeveloped countries. calls for business all his energies. This mainly requires planning and coordination of our efforts, and also for a happy harmony between complémentalité our own efforts and the help of all our friends. It is also important that the coming year towards harmonizing our development program with those countries that surround us

By producing more healthy and vibrant justice. We hope that during 1975 effective measures are taken to the profitability of our prison staff. That it is no longer a burden on the state but it is also involved in production work. This would also be beneficial to the health of the staff.

You know that we recently released all the detainees without files. They have left the prisons they unevenly populated. For the apathy of Justice during the First Republic, some detainees whose cases were transmitted to the competent courts yet, waiting for several years the judgment reserved for offenses allegedly committed. It is thus that some have spent detained in prison time than that which would have been imposed on them if their cases were tried. They should be released immediately. Similarly be released detainees whose judicial services estimate fully met the requirements for parole.

Let this year be finally adopted Rwandan solutions to the Rwandan social problems and a more active encouragement should be reserved for unions.

The Department of Social Affairs is specifically requested to study the current status of key project "social homes". It seems that this sector may end up outside the municipal development effort. It is therefore important that its activities are redesigned, refocused and boxed in the new communal organization.

Our production mainly depend on a clear definition of our economic policy and clearer definition of the economic and financial policy definition to which employ the services concerned and the National Council for Economic Policy. These services must be more severe and especially more efficient in the execution of our budget and the organization of our trade. Better define the policy to be followed in terms of import and export. No matter that the essential and preferably which is beneficial to the community.

Here we want to say that for us the notion of companies and private institutions must be clearly defined. What we demand is the participation of everyone, said public or private said, to increase production.

And Our diplomacy: it must remain active. Mainly for take us to this position somewhat encouraging poorest in the world, avoiding any expenditure of prestige and making a more vibrant appeal for solidarity and international cooperation. And we have said that our economic situation enjoins our friends who help us avoid procrastination or setbacks in agreements freely.

We have already asked officials to monetize teaching and adapt it to our reality in all its training courses: Program long and complex, but we must begin. And that those responsible for Education, at all levels, imbibe more of their bounden duty to reign in our National University of Rwanda and in all schools, a relaxed and friendly agreement to intellectual effort asked our students.

Rwandans,

Our economy requires you to focus specifically on increasing our agricultural production and livestock. Let us this year to provide better guidance to the people, to improve the tools and down over the field. This framework should lead among other objectives to the multiplication and extension of agricultural cooperatives and livestock as well as greater value to products.

We hope to further realize our program storage and distribution of food products.

To those who are responsible for urban planning and infrastructure work, we now ordain them to adopt only methods mainly using materials available in our country. And we stop to prevent people to build the pretext that they live within an urban riding. Imposed upon them, rather, in these districts, habitat models to build.

The year 1975 was also proclaimed "International Year of the Woman." We want our country special actions remind, during this year we start the role of women in Rwandan society in his dual capacity as a citizen and parent, citizen called the development of movement in our country, mother of Rwanda tomorrow.

Rwandans,

These are some objectives from the general program drawn 1 August 1973 and on which we will focus our efforts during the coming year. We realize all together. Because what we want is that we all holders of public authority, military, civil servants, students, merchants, religious and peasants, we all Rwandans were shooting our whole country, and in the same direction, that of development harmonious.

Increase our production. This is our only chance of survival. The square is in the action.

Members of the Diplomatic Corps, Comrades Members of the Committee for Peace and National Unity, Honorable Ministers, Ladies and Gentlemen, Fellow Rwandans,

We end by repeating each of the meeting to every Rwandan, our wishes for prosperity and joy for himself and all his family.

