Excellencies Members of the Diplomatic and Consular Corps, you just say, through your Dean, the very kind words touching and how to place the Rwandan people and towards our person. Let us turn to our honor to express, on activists and the National Revolutionary Movement activists nomads for Development, to you, that of your families, your fellow citizens, Sovereigns and Heads of State that you represent . Our sincere wishes for a peaceful and prosperous life, a happy new year 1976.

We also wish to express the thanks of the Rwandese people and our warmest congratulations on your respective personal effort that promotes the strengthening of our excellent relationship and deepening our cooperation, dynamic and active today,

Activists, Activists,

The impetus July 5, 1973 has awakened the hopes of our people and the ambitions of our Nation access to a wellness and building a better society.

Various achievements of modern progress promote this awareness, this multifaceted birth required and suction and emphasize the desire of their satisfaction. This beneficial process imposes a duty and a commitment. A duty to be attentive to this upward movement and irreversible of our people toward their fullness. The duty to be constantly available there or find their interests or threatened or compromised or forgotten. We finally committed must maintain and strengthen the unanimous and generous impulse of all available energies to promote national progress. We are confident of success: How could it be otherwise, indeed, since our revolution, purged of elements who had, a few moments of his journey, rendered diffuse and scattered, released and renovated Rwandan society?

Our commitment is to ensure the continuation and deepening of multiple acquired the work begun July 5, 1973, expanded and strengthened since then until today. These gains are called: inside stability, peace and national accord, the outside neighborliness, openness and cooperation.

If we have proclaimed 1974 the agricultural year and 1975 the year of the increase in production, 1976 should allow the deep implantation of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development. But it is necessary at the outset to state that our movement is less a political party which, more often, is only a amalgane partisan ambitions and juxtaposed and powerless and malicious combinations. Our Movement is more Union and the Rally of all Rwandans without exception, the alliance of all Rwandan forces for their progress. This vision should be that all managers, to be able to impregnate women activists and the National Revolutionary Movement for Development militants. These frameworks must therefore primarily target the actions that actually cause progress.

The year 1976 will therefore see the deployment and implementation of all the organs of our movement to sustain its momentum action taken July 5th 1973. inspirational Hearth and communion of thoughts and initiatives, the guide bodies design and programming of national development. We want them to constitute centers of thought and action, from which spring up constantly the actual promotion of community interests.

1976 Year of the Movement, the Year of Peace and National Unity; cornerstone of everything we do. Because for cementing the unity of our people, let us not forget, has been ignored for four centuries, and to assure him of better conditions to tackle its development, we have undertaken the action of 05 July 1973 that, on 05 July we published the principles drive our National Revolutionary Movement for Development. This part of union, awareness and impulse 'seemed to us to impose itself since the domestic decline in moral, ethical and social stifled the aspirations of our people' and that erasing extérieue alter his image.

The manifesto of July 5th, 1975 and is the engine of all our work. It dictates the Second Republic the major national guidelines on economic, social and cultural. It is therefore a duty for all activists and all activists, to imbibe the principles and translate into reality the ideals of our movement.

Some, those who disturb ideologies they have not imposed themselves, have already cried socialism. Rwandan their reply that socialism is not a plague, but a doctrine among others, a possible way of development. But Rwandan We have already said, and we are convinced that no doctrine can be taken as a magic talisman of progress.

The desire of each of us, the effort of every Rwandan is the single most solid guarantee of our development.

1976 Year of the Movement: continued efforts for the mobilization, sensitization of the masses for their own development. Continued effort in the fight against erosion, marriage, to the increased production, agriculture and 'breeding. Year of establishment of the second national development and the study of its annual performance in the evolution of our cities and our countryside. The establishment of cadres of our movement will facilitate this awareness, this awareness. Information and referral services also come out of their anonymity to contribute to this mobilization. We ask new, the technical services approach more people and explain the field the best way to manage, distribute, operate and monetize our land. They apply without delay to improve the storage and distribution system of our production.

If we said that the town is the basis of our development, the various cells of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development in our Country should be fine roots, blood vessels of this development in populations.

The year 1976, the Movement which requires us to guide instruction and education of youth in order to allow it to integrate into the production system. Also I part of our school reform should it be thorough and fixed permanently. That officials become convinced that such services, reform must be based on a work of profound reflections but they also know how to avoid a spirit of perfectionism that would result in irreparable delay. Because what counts "in this reform, as in any revolution is to define the framework, dare to start, but also know start from the right point.

We are aware of many problems that hinder our development, but more unfortunately, caused by the international economic situation beyond our control alone. Tributary of the global economy itself in crisis, the Rwandan economy has suffered more than any other, the disruptive effects. Rising raw materials exacerbated the difficulties of under-equipped, created a climate of uncertainty in the values ​​of all currencies and led to rising costs of derivatives and manufactured.

All these factors have weighed on our landlocked and dependent economy outside for much of his property .de consumption and equipment. The breakdown of essential goods inventories and the lengthening of the chain of intermediaries in our trade have amplified this inflation.

Faced with this situation, we have already taken some steps. It is in this context that the proliferation of small businesses has been hampered, a national price commission was structured and has undertaken a food interim storage building program. A credit distribution system that drains savings, long neglected the municipalities, was also started and will extend the popular banks throughout the country.

We ask the leaders of this action does not stop the momentum of the Rwandan thousand hills in the project cooperatives of savings in the risk that disappointment does not spoil the beginnings that were nevertheless promising.

Also ask us more attention to leaders of our economy and especially our National Council for Economic Policy for other measures complement those already taken, so that we remain masters of-the situation.

The year 1975 saw therefore confirm and broaden the bases of peace and national harmony. It leaves us outside, solid achievements of active diplomacy. Our work in this area focused on the total liberation of our continent, the solidarity of the Third World, and international cooperation.

We want and this modest contribution to the world is centered on the defense of human rights, mutual understanding and cooperation between peoples. We believe that international solidarity must be based on global progress and balance between nations.

This is why international trade restructuring is needed to stem the consequences of the global economic fluctuations. The reform of the international monetary system should go in the direction of the correction of the terms of trade, the deterioration accentuates the impoverishment of under-equipped and exhausted their foreign exchange reserves. We remain hopeful that the experts will focus on finding a just solution to this critical problem.

But despite these obstacles, the Third Mopde experienced success in 1975: Asian, Vietnamese and Cambodian peoples, long crushed by one of the bloodiest wars, won a resounding victory to rank their indomitable will and ambitions of peace, freedom and national unity.

Those victories have shown once again that a people is invincible when it fights for its unity, its legitimate rights and independence. We remain convinced that our Angolan brothers also end up understanding that peace and national unity are the only pillars of their release.

But in South Africa, repression is growing and blacks arrests multiply. Tyrants of this century continue to defy the world and say that populated of South Africa, Namibia and Zimbabwe have not the right to independence and freedom. We hope that the proponents of this apartheid finally understand that the era of colonization is over and that the armed forces must be silent before peace and justice.

The year 1975 has been, worldwide, the International Year of the Woman. It will have been for you, Rwandan militant, a year of awareness, reflection and organization. We are fully aware of your role in our society which, moreover, never, always, been altered: the role of motherhood, education, training and participation in the progress of society. We know that your responsibilities are real, especially when the national interest command you contribute with your suggestions, advice, actions in the fight against vagrancy, idleness and carelessness that degrades and degenerates our morals. Be assured that, to enable you to fulfill your responsibilities, the state will spare no effort.

And to close this year dedicated to women, we felt it necessary to take clemency measures in the place of our mothers and sisters who are misguided in the way of evil. The next decision is taken in respect of all women and girls found in the country's prisons.

The? convicted of having suffered punishment equal to or less than 20 years in prison will be released immediately. Those sentenced to life imprisonment will have their sentences commuted to imprisonment for 15 years. And finally the condemned to death have their sentences commuted to imprisonment for twenty years.

The Minister of Justice immediately execute these measures and take all necessary measures so that those found today in custody they too can benefit from this clemency their leaves the international year of the woman.

That, Your Excellencies, Members of the Diplomatic and Consular Corps, Rwandans, some of the gains that we leave 1975 ending.

That is beginning for you, for your families, for all that is dear to you a year of happiness, satisfaction and success. It is, for all the people of Rwanda, one year more joy, more unity and harmony, effort and courage in the common search Wellness national.

May the year 1976 be the year of a responsible democracy, true, claiming the full participation of each farmer, minister responsible at all levels, said public employee or private, military, every Rwandan to effort for optimum performance. This is the only chance for progress of the Rwandan people.

Long live the people Rwandans live international peace.

