Excellencies, Members of the Diplomatic and Consular Corps,

It is tradition that the beginning of each year is an opportunity for presentation of greetings. We are sensitive to those you just express through your Dean, Notre respect, that of our family and all the Rwandan people.

We are pleased to express our turn to you, each of you and your families, on behalf of all militants and all the activists of the Revolutionary National Development pulley Movement, Our best wishes throughout the Year 1977 . We also pray each of your Excellencies to transmit to the Heads of State and Government that you represent and through them, to your respective peoples, our wishes of happiness, peace and prosperity.

Taking this opportunity, we would like to extend to each of you our warm congratulations on the personal effort to strengthen our relations and improving cooperation between your country and ours. The understanding encountered when our country had to face the fuel supply crisis, as well as the starter a favorable response to help us deal with the failure of crops for our people, failure due to unpredictable weather, our methods agricultural yet to change and the lack of means of storage and distribution, are a testimony and a sufficient ground for You translate thank the Rwandan people. May 1977 be an opportunity to give this cooperation a wider dimension, more dynamic, more active and more human in the interests of our respective peoples and peace in the world, that peace can not be achieved without the sincere effective contribution and commitment of each of us.

But we are aware that the efforts to achieve peace among men do not reach all the expected results. If we have reason to be satisfied at the end of the year saw the consolidated peace at home and goodwill to multiply globally for closer or to reconcile those conflicts have separated. We will also see disappointments there even where large populations of layers of this planet had placed their greatest hopes.

While the action of our people went deepened to improve the foundation for its tranquility and unity, to give more force to its inter-African and global relationships. We need to see and regret that 1976 ends with a still painful reality are repression and killings that continue to hit on some of our African brothers. May this year be for the oppressors of the peoples, the last chance to understand the colonization era is over and that the time is not far when their weapons will be silent before determining farm and the invisible will of their victims to free themselves from the yoke of a selfish minority and unincorporated.

Faithful to the ideals of our movement, we reaffirm our full support to the peoples fighting for their freedom. The Rwandan people are aware of the need and usefulness for him and for Africa to rapid release and total the continent. Therefore, it provides assistance and support to its measurement, our brothers to their final victory against their bloodthirsty rulers.

But 1976 was also a year of major disappointments in the area of ​​the global economy. The restructuring of international trade in which the Third World had placed so much hope to curb the fluctuations of the economy, reform of the international monetary system that would have favored the correction of terms of trade, remain pitfalls countries sub- equipped face increasingly to their further impoverishment. One could hope that the international meetings including the UNCTAD meeting in Nairobi, the Non-Aligned Colombo and the Paris negotiations in the framework of North-South dialogue, to name but a few would make a start solution to the problems raised in the global economic order disturbance. But egos have not allowed that are satisfied the aspirations of those that solidarity more active and their number growing increasingly led to unite in a common struggle for their well-being and the interest of international peace.

However, despite these pitfalls that hamper progress in the third world and tend to increase tensions between nations, We believe it is in the interest of rich countries and poor countries to be convinced that the survival of each others has its basis in solidarity which must demonstrate a fair distribution of wealth between men and balancing nations. Progress must not remain confined to a few countries, such as poverty does not constitute the legacy of a great part of humanity.

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

The advent of the Second Republic has raised hopes for a better life and a better society. Our first duty is to support, maintain and strengthen the generous and unanimous enthusiasm with which you received the historic act of 5 July 1973 as a measure intended to promote national progress.

Our commitment and our desire to move forward in building the happiness of the people of Rwanda remain firm and unequivocal. After proclaiming 1974 agricultural year 1975, the increase of production, we made 1976 the year of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, supreme manifestation of our determination to consolidate, having favored the unity of our people.

On the threshold of the past year, we announced that 1976 would see the deployment and implementation of all the organs of the Movement to support its momentum action taken July 5th 1973. We said that these bodies M.R.N.D. be inspirational homes communion of thoughts and initiatives, they orientaient the design and programming of national development. And I would add that we want that they are centers of thought and action, from which spring up constantly the actual promotion of community interests.

These various organs of our movement are already in place and at work.

The Manifesto M.R.N.D. said:

"The time has come for the development of a mentality and a national consciousness specific to a people determined to become master of its destiny." The Movement organs must therefore know first bound by this principle, they should really be the basis for the renovation of the Rwandan man and Rwandan society.

But in this market, in this path that leads to the progress of the country, it is important to avoid any dispersion of energy in action.

On August 1, 1973, we said: "What the new government can promise the Rwandan people is to tackle all these socio-economic problems with more imagination, more efficiency, more realism. First a master plan must be developed which will be included in the short and medium-term programs. The program must be realistic and consider the possibilities of our resources. "

Fruit research and in-depth reflection on the problems of development of our country, this plan will be released soon and will be a tool, a guide to help us solve very complex socio-economic problems that we encountered. It will help every manager, every activist in the Movement to effectively meet the new demands of our society.

The document, therefore, will soon be available to us will be a reference tool for the Government and for all who have to implement it in economic choices, social and cultural the next five years.

It demands a change in attitudes by mobilizing all the forces of the nation for their participation in the implementation of the new national development program and invites us all to recognize our collective responsibility to break the deadlock in the -development and respond massively to the call to action.

We wish that all activists and all activists gathered in the M.R.N.D. see in the new Five Year Plan 1977-1981 a cry of hope for the future, a call to trust in our ability to develop and action to achieve the objectives laid down therein. We believe that the courage of our people and abundant resources of labor power can offset the lack of financial resources.

And as we said September 27, 1974, the objective is to produce more for us Rwandans least one policy option that a survival problem for ourselves and for our children.

Nevertheless, we know that while relying on our own strength to overcome the obstacles that stand in the way of our development, we must consider the times we live in, where economic interdependence among all countries invite us to strengthen inter-regional cooperation and develop trade with all countries loving peace and progress.

The Rwandan government has considered these requirements when it came to identify the areas covered by the plan and a consistent policy when it came to determining development actions to be undertaken during the next five years.

These considerations led us to assign to the Second Five Year Plan the following four missions that constitute the overall development strategy defined by the Government:

Meet the food needs of the population. Promoting better use of human resources. Improve community living and individual population. Improve Rwanda's position vis-à-vis the outside.

These missions are part of the dynamics of development beyond the period of one year plan; they involve in fact the establishment of new structure? political, economic, administrative and social development taking into account the requirements.

All sectors of national life must target production. They will be organized to exploit the national resources and the opportunities offered by international cooperation.

At the sectoral level, five areas will be reorganized: it is the rural development based on agriculture mining, industries and crafts economic services infrastructure and social development, cultural and administrative.

The agricultural sector employs more than 90 ° of our population must be better regulated, better stimulated to increase and diversify production for food, agricultural industry and exports.

This sector will not only ensure the survival of a continuous population growth but by an agricultural specialization and improvement of the storage system and distribution of crop, trim periodic famines which partly result from our still insufficient organization in field.

The effort for industrial and export crops must be redoubled.

For the industrial sector, a complex program involving both the extractive industries, our raw materials processing industries and manufacturing import substitution will be developed. Economic and financial measures should be taken to promote their promotion (Investment Code, credit reorganization, creation of industrial promotion office ...).

The creation of jobs in industry and crafts is a decongestion instruments farms. Its development is therefore essential to ensure the future of our children.

In this national industry must receive encouragement pushes investment.

The development of economic services being related to changing productions both agricultural and industrial, also depends on the infrastructure in place.

Among these facilities, lines of communication to the outside and between the different regions of the Country and energy infrastructure occupy a privileged place. This is why their share in the investments planned under the Five-Year Plan is the largest rural development after absorbing about half of the expected financing transactions. We know that the needs of the country in this sector are immense. The choice of priorities is particularly necessary in the light of economic justifications.

Infrastructure construction also creates jobs. Also the use of high labor intensive techniques on public works is it to impose systematically.

The social, cultural and administrative sector is the fifth held in the Plan. It aims at the promotion of human resources. Although this area is covered in last place, it is nonetheless the development of the keystone, because man is the main instrument and the goal of economic progress. This is why the social, health, cultural and administrative should be organized so as to improve labor productivity and collective living conditions and individual. Ruralization and professionalization of teaching, the development of mass medicine, organization of the labor market and strengthening the town to make the basis of development, are the main sector development objectives.

Socioeconomic common equipment, the creation of administrative and social infrastructure and training should aim for this purpose. Needs are particularly keen to rural areas, they are also felt in urban areas particularly in the most densely populated neighborhoods.

Ultimately, the aims and objectives of the 1977-1981 Plan are intended to determine an increase in production needed to improve the living conditions of our people and the development of National Heritage by better use of country resources, aid outdoor serving booster. Everything will be done to mobilize the energies and channel financial resources into the productive sectors without neglecting of course the expenses necessary to keep us safe.

Labor is abundant, but it must be used rationally and form, given the opportunities on the labor market.

By cons, our internal financial resources are limited, given the financing needs. The budget consolidation will have to be ensured by a gradual adjustment expenses of various departments according to the production and safety priorities.

Improving the management of staff and serious programming equipment are also the consolidation measures for the management of Public Finance, parallel to strengthening the organizations management control parastatal.

We also remind managers of private companies the urgency demanded by the principle affirmed by the Manifesto that "To whet their dedication and encourage them to perform better, worker Industries and Companies will be progressively associated with production planning studies and business management. "

The choice of investments should also be better streamlined through the setting of criteria for selecting projects and improving procedures for the presentation and management of public financing projects.

Rwandans,

While we are cleaning our Public Finance and that we appeal to international solidarity, the foundation of self-sustained development can only be strong if collectively and individually, the entire working population contributes to nation-building effort in the context of investment-work, each in its sector. The achievements in the context of community development work show what a people mobilized for development purposes is capable. This work will be planned in the context of socio-economic targets set. The strengthening of the management at the municipal level and available to joint supplementary means to local resources will support the effort of the population.

As the Five Year Plan 1977-1981 he emphasizes this investment work. The year 1977 starting year of this plan, we want the year of the national effort, years of effort every Rwandan to build our country. Year in which the UMUGANDA must be exploited and made profitable.

Finally, in-depth studies on socio-demographic will clear management objectives elements of population growth in relation to the development of human resources which, together with our landscapes and climate, the best assets for the future.

In the social field, the Manifesto says that "the current system of scattered settlement does not benefit the most people possible [es benefits of socio-economic infrastructure or rationally plan rural development. Also the Movement he advocated the phasing out of the system. The steps needed to change mentalities must still be respected. "

We believe the time has come for us to consider the best methods to schedule the execution of the injunction of the manifesto of our Movement. Alongside this program, we should be more concerned about the home improvements. So we named the 1977 "Year of Housing". We therefore hope that during this year the specialized services, mainly the Mortgage Fund are provided with means and make the effort to build houses for both public sector employees and private sector.

We also hope that the various private companies multiply the housing construction program for staff of all ranks. Finally, we ask every Rwandan special effort to further improve its habitat, preferably with local materials.

The Movement does not command he that "all citizens enjoy the best conditions to be more useful to society by maximizing his physical, intellectual and moral"? We believe a better habitat is one of the conditions for optimal performance.

This general policy of the Government which essentially seeks an increase of the country's activities by greater participation of the population is supplemented by practical guidance in sectoral policies.

In the rural sector, the slogan is the intensification and diversification of agricultural activities. Instruments in this sector policy is mainly focused on training, facilitation and coaching at the National Revolutionary Movement for Development of cells that must be production cells.

Agricultural services prefectural and municipal responsible for the animation and guidance of the farmers will have to be reorganized and expanded to support an action production under rural communes renovated.

Ruralization primary education will be generalized and post-school training centers such as CERAR will be restructured and multiplied to satisfy this requirement that is training young rural.

The scarcity of land available for the creation of new farms led to the adoption of a land rationalization policy whose sole aim is to remove once and for all sub-holdings own practices to farming units disproportionate to the available labor.

Apart from institutional reforms, such as education reform, the reform of rural structures, the municipal administrative reform and the cooperative movement, deemed essential, rural development of the country will rest a long time on a set of projects funded, most time on outside help. A strategy of choice must prevail in the selection of projects, avoiding dispersal and waste of financial and human resources available. Our Government therefore give priority to those projects that are presented both as integrated or global actions and as instruments to promote rural movement in the world by itself.

In the area of ​​industrial, craft and mining, we must strengthen the Industrial Promotion Office and create a National Research Department to prepare, by appropriate studies, the creation of new industries. Similarly, mentoring crafts and organization of cooperative services to artisans for a strengthening of activities in this sector should be implemented in the shortest time.

Activists, Activists,

That, without complacency, the socio-economic situation of our country and the prospects of its development. We give us account as well as the means to implement in order to achieve the objectives of the Plan are very complex.

Development policy set out by the Government concerned all sectors of the economy; it is for all executives and all Rwandans.

To meet production goals, we must rely first on the active participation of all of us:

In agriculture, for more food products from the production effort and greater care given to industrial crops by using modern farming techniques popularized by communal agronomists (erosion control, improved seeds, fertilizer, drainage and irrigation marsh particular). For the workers of mines and industries, for more intensive work and awareness of their role in building a richer nation. For executives of local authorities, for executives of prefectural governments and those of the central government, whatever their functions and roles in the community, their participation in the country's development program must materialize into concrete initiatives level of services, greater discipline in work and awareness of everyone's responsibility in the implementation of development operations. The administration should be the main facilitator of development: if it can not effectively fulfill this role, it will have failed in its mission.

The participation of all the country's development program requires orchestration of operations both at national and local level. Decentralization of institutions is essential to facilitate the implementation of effective rural actions. The municipality and the municipal administration, aided by the leaders of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development of cells, will have to play a greater role in driving development operations particularly in rural areas where production efforts will be most important.

The recycling of communal councilors and heads of committees cells is envisaged to raise awareness of this action.

Rural development must be integrated at this level; which implies a genuine harmonization between production and marketing, between production, infrastructure and equipment.

At headquarters, a decentralization of responsibility is necessary for faster development of projects and control their execution.

And the level of public participation in companies, parastatal companies say, an effort will be made to improve their management and organization of their activities. The responsibilities in this area, will be entrusted to professional management companies and organization.

The sector of trade and services will play an active role in the new directions of development. The involvement of this sector in the field of food products in the country is strongly encouraged to create opportunities for agricultural surpluses in some regions and ensure regular major markets nationwide supply. Reorganization and strengthening of the OPROVIA parallel to an extension of the activities of cooperative marketing and storage will be undertaken primarily in the course of 1977.

Members of the Diplomatic and Consular Corps,

All these achievements contemplated as part of the 1977-1981 plan and on which the development of our country, can not be supported only by the country's resources. The creation of new infrastructure, the implementation of integrated rural development projects, the creation of new industries and the establishment of training centers and health centers require significant capital and skilled technicians whose country has not enough. The external assistance from international organizations and friendly countries helps fill some gaps in our administration and our economy. This assistance should be used wisely and without waste because for valuable it is, it remains insufficient to meet our needs.

A dialogue between the government and aid agencies is envisaged as part of a round table. This consultation is a better allocation of resources available to the country for the harmonious development of its economy. The Government proposes to gradually take more initiatives in the use of external assistance as and when it will master better, by a rigorous public investment programming, the workings of the economy. We hope that the confidence of foreign financial duly reflects our effort coordination and integration of development actions.

Foreign aid is and still will be in the coming years a significant source of funding for development projects. We want the most massive and responsive to the priorities of our National Development Plan. Since our country is ranked among the five least developed countries. We hope that developed countries will make special support measures taking into account our specific situation of landlocked countries to low income and facing rapid population growth.

Rwandans,

The ultimate goal of our efforts in the next plan is the handling of our own destiny. The effective independence of our country was built by an everyday development effort. The involvement of everyone in this effort as part of a more humane and more social economy is the only guarantee of our company's success.

It is on these objectives and guidelines that complement and clarify our general program drawn 1 August 1973 that we must focus our efforts during the five year opened up the New Year 1977.

We assigned as duty, as part of our movement, plan and organize the country's economy in order to exploit rationally all national resources to meet the growing needs of the national community.

We take this opportunity to reiterate our appeal to each and every one of you so that together we achieve all these goals. The individual and collective contribution to this national work of reconstruction is a prerequisite to improving our standard of living and well-being of society. Our happiness and survival depend essentially on the seriousness of which will be marked our action in implementing the plan that we are launching.

But we believe that for the success of such an extensive program, greater discipline will be required of everyone, rulers and ruled, leaders and led both public and private sector. As each of you can count on us, we believe allowed to appeal to you all and to rely on everyone in the interests of the nation.

We want to finish this message by wishing you all a Happy New Year 1977. Whether Happy for you, for your families, it gives you a lot of satisfaction in your occupation and is filled with successes in what you undertake. Whether for all Rwandan people, one more year of joy and tranquility, a year of efforts in the common search Wellness national.

To all we say HAPPY NEW YEAR 1977, Habitat.

Long live the Rwandan people, live international peace.

