Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

The advent of the 11th Republic which we celebrate the 4th Anniversary today is part of the most significant events that have marked the history of our people in their struggle for freedom. The necessary decision of 5 July 1973 which aimed to give the country a national renewal opportunity did not intend to tarnish or erase the past appear where the courage and suffering of the people to which we belong and which We have the Republic who is the The purpose of our joy and our pride. The new framework is to route the country is to perfect the work of liberation accomplished by the great majority of our people in a global movement that will remain among the most famous of national history, that of 1959, which we have won and deserved our independence. The National Revolutionary Movement for Development that We want to work to complete this work of liberation and consolidate freedom of the Rwandan people is this new framework.

Excellencies, Members of the Diplomatic Corps, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, Militants of M.R.N.D.,

If we are thus collected on this stage is to commemorate together and in union with all the Rwandan people, with an expression that, for us, is made of recognition, trust and hope, the 15 years of our Independence the advent of the Second Republic, and finally the National Revolutionary Movement for Development foundation, synthesis Our views for the present and our future directions.

This triple commemoration as first reference the 15th Anniversary of our Independence acquired on 1 July 1962.

Here are fifteen years that the Rwandan people after a fierce struggle against oppression after a feudal system embedded itself in a system of colonization has made the revolution which gloriously enrolled in its history, one whose fundamental meaning is the rehabilitation of every Rwandan in his human dignity and his rights in society; but also the release of the double yoke imposed him.

There are fifteen years that the Republic proclaimed by the Rwandan people during his 1959 revolution is a symbol to the world of the achievements of this people in its march towards Independence that we celebrate.

There are fifteen years has been proclaimed National Independence, closing the revolutionary work of the People which we share this day especially be proud of, for allowing Rwandans to participate in the life of humanity and for opening the way for the construction and development of the Nation.

There are fifteen years that Rwanda free presiding over his own destiny entered into dialogue with other Nations and contributes to their development through the efforts of his own children in a cooperative movement and mutual respect.

Fifteen years have passed since the day the radical and rapid change imposed by the 1959 revolution and enshrined independence has become a principle of conduct and participation in the development of the country = with this new era, the slave becomes citizen and set out to look for what, above its own interests, would be useful to the community.

Fifteen years have passed since the day of Independence which crowned the Rwandan revolutionary process came devote acquired from the People of the fight, thereby confirming that the change means operated well, that not only as individuals but also as members of the vast majority of humanity, the obscure and the poor, all those who had lived through the night and subjection to all the powers, had to get up and become the supreme rulers of the country.

We celebrate the birthday of fifteen years of independence of our country to safeguard which we are determined to do everything possible.

And as we have expressed it here a year ago, our deepest desire is that this Independence why more of Ours have shed their blood can still find his best warranty in the people, take root, symbolize peace overcame tyranny ensure the triumph of justice against all forms of alienation, always be the foundation of the hopes and confidence of the nation itself.

We are aware of the magnitude of the task that lies ahead to enjoy true independence, one in which everyone is able to define itself, to lie, to know his way, be responsible and free in his country . But despite the obstacles that mark our journey, we remain convinced that if our people and its leaders remain with the determination that the life and future of Rwanda depend on the union and the efforts of all, which seems a dream to some may even exceed our expectations in its realization, thanks to everyone's contribution to this community work, personal and collective participation in the construction and progress of the country.

True Independence as We hear so claims to one and all that our concerns for the country are actually shared by the rulers and the ruled; which means more faith in the objective and more availability of hand sides.

Excellencies, Members of the Diplomatic Corps, Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

Independence of Rwanda proclaimed on 1 July 1962 finalized the advent of the People's Power and confirmed in their prerogatives, those that the People, by its revolution begun in 1959, had risen to power to ensure its interests.

Rather than concentrate on the consolidation of new forms of life born of the victory of the Rwandan people on their oppressors, part of the new rulers seize this victory and forget the objectives of the Revolution.

On the way to their failure, they saw these unworthy leaders monopolize the country's wealth and concentrate in the hands of a greedy minority, terrorize and divide the very people to whom they owed their place to hatred and falsehood serving dissolving their partnership business.

Democracy meant for the people the end of oppression was emptied of its contents. Cunning, duplicity, the race for power, intrigues, the emergence of regional power, nepotism and sycophancy, influence peddling and the establishment of privileges brought about the historic intervention of the Rwandan Army dated 5 July 1973 intervention that restored the peace, unity and trust within the nation.

The welcome and support that our people have reserved for this historic decision was to assess the dangers of which we have drawn. The enthusiasm with which Our call for unity in action for the reconstruction of the country has been heard is a true testimony that the action of 5 July 1973, met the expectation of the nation baffled by a handful of managed adventurers.

Because the action of the Rwandan Army saved our country from ruin and relieved Our People of anguish which had plunged its leaders, it is the object of our joy and our pride. This is why it is the second reason for the festivities that day.

We are celebrating the fourth anniversary of the restoration of peace in the nation. Four years of peace in which we were able to measure the contribution of this people in the work of development.

And to illustrate this contribution, it pleases us to raise as examples, some remarkable achievements, the importance and interest can already be measured with the special attention we have given to them.

We announced in the early days of the Republic Second concern remains Ours to associate people to the realization of any project is concerned. Our various movements and those of our collaborators inside the country have had no other purpose than to share and explain our willingness to lead the involvement of Rwandan development work that is necessary to our survival . The desired dialogue conducted over the past four years has enabled and encouraged to reduce the distances between the rulers and the ruled.

To respond more effectively to the requirements of the new guidance, we decided a municipal restructuring both in the quality of leaders as targets. The Commune today we actually appears as a radiation center of community activities that inhabits it. Even if perfection is not reached, the action initiated in this direction by our government is working.

It is the same concern to bring government closer to the citizen and to meet the demand of our people in several prefectural districts, sub-prefectures were created. Where they are installed, they must be at their level of transmission belts and coordination centers between the authority of the Prefecture and the municipalities under their own authority.

Determined to implement everything that can serve the priorities and choices that we set in our special keynote address from August 1, 1973, we, among the means, first stressed the value of work in the life of the country and each citizen. The necessity and utility of the work, especially manual, being known to the majority of our populations, we wanted his experience to be extended and to be considered a duty for every Rwandan citizen in any sector it belongs and for the national community.

This revaluation of the work to which was invited the entire population is now a fact; one who lived only his manual work and especially his hoe, ceased to be the laughing stock of traditional loafers and bureaucrats outside the realities of the rural masses. We can already see and congratulate ourselves on the results achieved under the UMUGANDA which is like the synthesis of our vision of the overall effort that provides the population's desire to. advance: Boulevard of UMUGANDA, multiple roads built within the towns, fields of coffee and vegetables scattered on the national territory, ponds designed to promote the expansion of fish farming, school buildings constructed the intervention of the population, cooperatives that emerge here and there, that should improve the management, perhaps, but that exist. All examples of the results of our efforts.

The objective and honest observer will not fail to recognize that a big step has been made since the advent of the 11th Republic for the development of the country and for the betterment of its people.

Alongside the achievements We say that property to the mass of our citizens, alongside the buildings to house at least part of our administrative services, long moldy projects in drawers are functional today as, to quote mainly those -There, roads Kigali-Rusumo and Ruhengeri-Gisenyi Factory for processing of our bananas, stationery Zaza, new tourism infrastructure across the country, the expansion of the Guest-House Gabiro, the tea plants, the National University who took a new extension.

How not to mention the electrification of the country that exceeds the expectations that we could make it ten years ago: the installation of high and medium voltage lines is for us a further motive of encouragement since we compare these achievements with the inheritance from the colonial era and also of the First Republic.

Our intention is not to inventory and list all the achievements of the Second Republic. We limit ourselves to these examples which we can add that the expansion of our relations with other countries can see the day in a more or less near future. We mention obtaining major funding such as Gisaka-Migongo project, the water supply project in Kigali and Butare Central on Mukungwa, hotels Kacyiru and Gisenyi.

But above all another embodiment, Rwandans, we live in a climate of peace and national accord. We therefore ask all our employees, they fully share the joy we feel to have done our best to develop our country.

But we ask these same employees, at any level they are placed in the national hierarchy, share, with the same conviction and the same stubbornness, our daily effort to maintain and strengthen this climate of relaxation, peace and national concord.

Employees who are not guided by these principles, would not be good collaborators.

This climate agreement sought inside the country, we also want our relations with the outside. The manifesto does not command us peaceful coexistence and cooperation while respecting the sovereignty of each nation?

It is in this coexistence policy framework peaceful that Rwanda has striven to maintain a climate of good neighborliness with visits at all levels. This policy specifically involved in the establishment of the Economic Community of Great Lakes Countries to which we wish, through the channel of its senior officials who share our joys that day every success for the integrated development of our region.

It is in this context that also must place our last trips abroad whose purpose is other than the maintenance and strengthening of our mutual friendship and defining new frameworks for cooperation.

The year 1977, Habitat will have been the year of our second five-year plan. The plan that we have just adopted completes the definition of the objectives outlined in our keynote there four years. As we said December 31, 1976:

"We want all the activists and all activists gathered in the National Revolutionary Movement for Development see this new Five Year Plan 1977-1981 a cry of hope for the future, a call to confidence in our capacity for development and action to achieve the objectives defined therein.

We believe that the courage of our people and abundant resources of labor power can compensate for the lack of our financial resources. "

Let us just now to invite all executives, all services both public and private, to make their daily work plan. Inspired by the National Revolutionary Movement for Development principles and designed in the spirit of our national realities, the plan will guide all our thinkers, our administration, our own efforts and external investments of our friends.

We are aware of the magnitude of the task that lies ahead and the many issues that have not yet been answered. However, this can not help but reiterate our gratitude for the understanding you have shown to our goal and the efforts already made so that together civilian and military, religious and secular, young and old were building us the happiness of our Country.

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

We can be proud of what together we have achieved since the historic July 5, 1973. But let's be together convinced that the course on which we are all invited is not without obstacles and our effort must be to even more intensified. We know the circumstances that determined the Army to take power suddenly raised a number of problems both in his role as its integration into the nation's activities. Whereas before July 5, 1973 the role of the Army was purely focused on defense, we must now expand and gradually move towards an association that role in the work of national reconstruction, the Defense of Rwanda as it -even as mentioned previously the work of the entire Rwandan society.

Integrated to the people and after him, the Army must primarily defend the people but also to be associated with its development, as we must balance the needs of our defense and our economic realities.

Other obstacles we are tense and we, more than in other times, call your vigilance, that moral revolution effected July 5, 1973, continues to brighten, with the same brilliance, our efforts towards progress .

To those who exercise power, who have the heavy responsibility to ensure the happiness of Rwandans, we ask that they do not forget their mission; the power they have to practice to be used to build human happiness; the People's happiness must come before any other consideration whatsoever. The supreme law which must guide all our actions, it is the interest of the governed, protection of their rights.

We have sufficiently stressed that the main role of administrative services is that animate the people for progress. The administration is the main channel of irrigation development. Leaders at all levels must ensure daily that these irrigation canals are never blocked.

The people must be constantly mobilized, educated so that it does not get used only to receive orders, but he can really, and every day, participate actively in their own development.

To those who are called to serve the interests of the people across the Civil Service, we ask that they put at least as much zeal to fulfill their duties to the community, they show when dealing with their own business.

And that officials make an extra effort to ensure that the central government is a nursery of corruption or demagogy.

To those who serve the judiciary, we recall solemnly that justice must aim at fairness. In front of Justice ruled that both leaders must be brought to the same level. Let them remember their recommendations made in our Keynote Address 1 August 1973. Let them keep more of the spirit of stipend and carelessness.

The manifesto says: "The Movement requires all managers a high conscientiousness. Discipline, honesty, competence and realism must be reflected in all their actions. "

We therefore condemn any thirst stipend and any repetition of past events that would lead to the stifling of freedoms and rights of a party of the People. The days when a citizen who was clearly a victim of injustice, instead of asking the courts the protection and repair of its rights, must kneel and ask fear through that misery and worse abuse will s 'down on him, this time should be considered by the judges as totally exceeded. We expect our judges that, in the interest of their noble mission, they are men of integrity, who walk on the path marked by truth and justice.

For if it is not so, they risk becoming the instrument of the whims of those in power or have a lot of means. A few of them we require a change in behavior with regard to certain litigants of modest means. Missing your duty is directly threaten the rights that the nation has finally recovered fifteen years ago. ^ We especially recommend them to continue courageously struggle started against the misappropriation of public funds.

Let us mobilize all our survival and well-being of our future generations.

That the responsible services have always in mind that the great Rwandan youth must no longer be seen as a threat of explosion, but mobilized for initiatives and work, rather it is a real asset production and development.

Social services must also think of effective measures to protect the youth against laziness, banditry and depravity. Fight all the old feudal spirit with all his cronies intrigue, false rumors and laziness.

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

To finalize the work begun four years ago, we felt necessary to create an appropriate framework for building momentum in our struggle for survival. This framework is the National Revolutionary Movement for Development which we celebrate the 2nd Birthday, third pattern of the festivities that day.

Designed to be the privileged place of the gathering, the source of peace and development of all Rwandans, we see him as a means of action for a better Rwanda People's Service in the present and in the future.

On several occasions already, during the two years of its existence, we expressed our thoughts and wishes about the National Revolutionary Movement for Development. We will not repeat them here. Let us just enough to recall that, as we said at the first Congress of Our Movement

"Our goal for us Rwandans, is to work to the full development of our country, is to ensure that we take every Rwandan its poverty, work that can only be achieved by pooling our efforts . Our Movement wants us together in unity, authentically Rwandans to work to build a country worthy for Rwandans, in a framework of individual and collective responsibility, a responsible democracy. "

Now it is up to managers in this movement that we have put in place to tackle the task that are made all the basic principles contained in the National Revolutionary Movement for Development Manifesto: cement the spirit of unity and national concord, the mobilization of the people for its development, rely primarily on our own strength, the unit of work and unity in the work.

We ask these executives to be truly by their activity leaders of the Movement, the source and center development ideas, the model of honesty in the people of the service. Whether they are leaders of men by the example of their lives and their actions, for their dedication.

We hope that with their support, the Movement that gathers us all achieve its objective. We are confident that through their action, the lives of our people who émargera the crucible that is the National Revolutionary Movement for Development will be much different than it had before. The dignity and brotherhood of the children of our people as the National Revolutionary Movement for Development wants to see flourish still bear the marks of scars, fears of a number of us. What action frames serve to reassure them. And may the service of these officers to be at a level where the man in the enjoyment of his rights and those of the community.

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

This is the message we wanted to send you on this day when we celebrate the holidays of our nation's independence, the fourth anniversary of the Second Republic and the second anniversary of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development.

Our hope is that these festivities are an opportunity for a retrospective way since the proclamation of our independence on 1 July 1962; but meditate together on the work accomplished since July 5, 1973, when we all said NO to the disorder and have restored peace in the nation. We take this opportunity to renew our firm hope that the Rwandan people, mobilized within our Movement, will feel more involved in the work of consolidating the foundations of the life of the nation and it will work with more determination in a spirit a true revolution, that of commitment and action.

Long live the Rwandan people.

