Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

Here come again the day, every year, since the advent of the Second * 'Republic, gather us in the company of friends from different backgrounds to make a solemn tribute and express our gratitude to all those who, near or far, have devoted or dedicated to the defense of our country, and therefore to all Rwandans who are endeavoring to search for and protect the tranquility and peace of others. This memorable day also gives us the opportunity to take stock of our modest achievements and remind our focus on defense.

Since gaining independence, our country, like all other young nations, has experienced many adventures. Besides the satisfaction due to the euphoria of independence, difficulties were quick to arise who imposed heavy sacrifices. Some of his children have shed their blood for vivid Rwanda. Their memory will live forever for an example of patriotism and self-sacrifice for future generations. We have already asked the relevant departments should establish a suitable device to perpetuate their memory. For they have deserved Part sacrificing their lives for the survival of the greatest number and best interests of the nation.

Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, Activists, Activists,

One of the constants of motion from the historic July 5, 1973, our policy of openness to all countries loving peace and freedom. This principle enshrined in our first commitment in our message of 6 July 1973 and the National Revolutionary Movement for Development Manifesto, materialized every day in the life of Rwanda today. It is only to be convinced to note the presence here today of the Armed Forces representatives of friendly countries, we came to testify sympathy trademarks of their compatriots of the Rwandan People place.

Distinguished Heads of Delegations, Honorable Members of delegations, we welcome in you worthy representatives of heads of state for which we have a very high regard. And as such, we welcome you as brothers and comrades in arms.

Our sincere wish is that your stay in the country of a thousand hills or to the extent of the friendship between our countries to yours; and at the end of your stay with us, we ask you to be our messengers to your illustrious Heads of State for their renewing our sentiments of highest esteem and constant friendship.

Activists, Activists,

There is no need today to redefine the mission of our Armed Forces. Guardians of peace, they have been for 17 years without fail in this sacred duty and immutable. For peace remains among the basic aspirations of man, he is attached to his self-preservation. Protect peace so it protect life. Our Armed Forces have so far protected the lives of our people. It is this conviction which is the pride and satisfaction of all who have the privilege to participate in this noble task.

It is not our intention to disregard our men, especially as individuals, are not immune to failures inherent in human nature. We would not then we welcome the success achieved.

The key for us is to be able to say, without excess illusions that overall, our Armed Forces carry out their mission with dedication.

To reinforce their dedication, and patriotism, leadership works hard to spread the incorrigible and encourage goodwill discipline and cohesion. It will continue to do so, thus avoiding a swarm of worthless characters, wearing indignity with the splendor normally reserved the best. For it is only on this condition that our Armed Forces will still be able to maintain peace and public tranquility, factors essential for harmonious development. We can not emphasize enough about discipline at all times, both in the framework for the company, within the National Gendarmerie as in the Army. If the members of the Armed Forces need to be a model of discipline, executives must lead by example.

We renew our call to all those who indulge in ease and believe that increasing the weight of the stars should correspond to increased indiscipline and irresponsibility. Military discipline demands that it submit or we will démette especially as other conditions met, it is within reach of the man and is not to be confused with any frustration. We remind all officials never dispose of a just discipline, but firm and respectful of the human person. All Schools and training centers should make this their policy set everyday; because the profession of arms has its easements and sizes. Has it not been said that "the honor of the military coincides with their sacrifices"? It is a universal truth, even when it would be tarnished by a few individual vulgarities, is all the more striking. 11 trainers must take to heart the depth of this reality to prepare their students for their duty tomorrow. We want officers and sub-officers honest and dedicated, able to realize the reason for their presence in the ranks and to stay abreast of the realities of our Armed Forces and our country. It's not perfection that we demand, but the dignity and conscience. If the training of our officers disregards these essential qualities that should characterize any leader of men, it will have lost its course. An officer must be a fully responsible man. It must, as so says one of the greatest men of our century, "dare, decide and take."

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development.

If our Army has come a long way in 17 years, her younger sister, the National Gendarmerie, yet his first steps. And in a world where opposing currents, diverse influences and interests of struggles sometimes circumvent the vigilance of the soldiers of the law and beyond the means available to them, we are forced to recognize that there are still many problems to solve: organizational problems, sense of duty, infrastructure problems, coaching, equipment problems, etc.

The country will have to make sacrifices for the units of the Gendarmerie Nationale to be set up.

But these problems should not be an excuse for sloppiness or defeatism before the upsurge of indiscipline of some idle citizens.

But instead, the peacekeepers must close ranks, making a virtue need to be right all those who refuse to calm and stress. We believe that there is a problem of will, consultation and method.

And the goal sought, namely a general and permanent peace, will be achieved only insofar as all services, all authorities take their responsibilities: This is the Armed Forces, communal police, prefectural authorities and communal and the entire population. We are determined to continue the fight for the tranquility of each and all. Some bad comments, call it militarism. They badly chosen label. It is in any case of how we intend to guarantee peace to all. It will be the same for the defense of the integrity of the national territory. This effort can not be considered as an exclusive domain of the Armed Forces. They are the emanation of the people to which they are fully integrated. Therefore, duties incumbent on the entire national community. Defense of the country should be the concern of all Rwandans; it is not just reserved for a team of specialists.

But defense concepts of self-sacrifice for the good of the community appear to some, as already expired vocables pretext that war is averted for ever or that which would not have no common measure with the importance and means of our country.

Those who indulge in such thoughts have no sense of history or the realities of every day. For a strong as vain consolation, most people of the world would give up the maintenance of armies. But alas, history has created precedents to make irreversible: it imposed an armed peace. The arms have become essential to the war does not take place. Yet, it takes place every day, is there somewhere missing or out of balance, or that deterrence has ceased to exist, or the antagonism of interests triumphed over the best intentions.

Everything leads us to believe that gone are the days when the world will think to switch weapons. Indeed, how would it be possible if such an event each day the number of weapons of mass destruction to further increases if the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks that make trampled in perpetual staged while multiply in the world nuclear power plants to intentionally ill-defined objectives; and how such a contingency would it be conceivable if many economies derive their essential resources of the arms industry?

So we are trained, in spite of us, in one irresistible and irreversible created and maintained by man to his great misfortune. Would this then smaller would claim escape the destiny of this world yet continues to run despite their incessant curses? Only when greeting a few will be shared by all, men have been better than ever to devote their efforts for peaceful purposes. Our sincere hope is that this is so in the coming centuries.

What we want for our part for the present and the coming days is to allow our people to work peacefully at his wellness. We want to assure him also enjoy the fruits of his labor. This is the purpose of our Armed Forces is the justification for the sacrifices made by the people to maintain it. Once assured that first mission, the Armed Forces participate in the construction and development of the country through concrete actions. But we do not intend to list all the achievements in the assets of the Armed Forces in this area.

Rather, we invite all those who want to go on the field as around the capital inside the country, realize the origin of the samples that come to pass before our eyes.

To this double national territory defense mission and participation in the development of the country, is grafted another no less essential task: to contribute to civic education and functional training of the great national-school youth. Thus fifteen centers set up as cooperatives involved two thousand children, saving the vagrancy and banditry to become good citizens. These efforts will be continued and improved to help make the youth of this country an instrument of peace, national consciousness and progress.

These, then, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, the guidance given to our Armed Forces that we will continue to develop to the extent of our possibilities, either organizationally, whether in the field of equipment, equipment and training. To this end, we invite all our employees to constantly demonstrate a spirit of creativity to continuously improve the organization and training of our Armed Forces in the Second National Development Plan.

The help of friendly countries we remain valuable as an adjunct to our own efforts. We are in a world of interdependence where no country can not live in isolation. A fortiori, the smaller and poorer countries. Our country is one of them, and loyal to the direction mapped out by the Manifesto of our Movement which considers as fundamental rule in relations between nations, peaceful coexistence and cooperation while respecting the sovereignty of each nation, we have called on the cooperation of friendly countries who agreed to give us their support. We want to seize this solemn occasion for them to reiterate our full satisfaction with the encouraging results achieved in this sector of national life, and renew the thanks of the Rwandan people for this contribution to security and development.

And as we have said on other occasions, we remain firmly convinced of the need for every citizen of Rwanda, to work with all its strength to the development of his country, external assistance for extra. We would like the cooperation that we are agreed and we want increased and the contributions of all the children of the Nation interfere in perfect harmony, so they get the maximum benefit to the country, allowing it to carry out the program we set within our National Development Plan. We therefore hope that this cooperation knows more impetus to peaceful purposes dimensions that are ours. And this help is today we need more than ever today when our isolation, combined with a global economy harder every day, we plunge into an inextricable frame of supply difficulties. Technical Coopérants both civilian and military present in our country are better placed to make an authentic witness. They are a source of valuable information for their peoples and Governments which we ask a more aid and substantial.

The Rwandan people are peaceful people. He always wanted to live in harmony and understanding both within its borders with neighboring peoples brothers. The charges he is required to maintain the Armed Forces will seek that goal.

Peace, harmony and cooperation, are the basis of our foreign policy which, for us, is the only one worth pursuing, for the good of our country and in the interest of the international community.

We are indeed on the side of those who seek peace and understanding between people regardless of color, race or ideological tendencies.

It is in this context that we have repeatedly expressed our concerns and our concerns before the mounting dangers and proliferation of hotbeds of tension in Africa and elsewhere in the world. Supporters of peace in our people, we have always appealed to the international community to commit itself resolutely in the way of the establishment in the world of an era of peace and international cooperation, prerequisites to achieve economic and social progress. We remain of those who fight to end the race to advanced weaponry, for our earth can live constantly under the threat of total annihilation, instead of fighting for a better world of peace and true progress.

On the occasion of October 26, feast of the Rwandan Armed Forces, but also by the OAU day dedicated to solidarity with the peoples of South Africa, We must, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, renew our solidarity our Brothers ZIMBABWE, NAMIBIA and Azania who endure the ordeal of apartheid and domination and struggling to regain their rights to freedom and self-determination. While elsewhere the scars of colonization have faded, there in Southern Africa, the white minority still dedicates the black man from the drudgery, discrimination, torture and often death. We would therefore like to appeal to the International community to use all its weight and struggle to ban these forms of barbarism that have too marred our century.

We can still painful to witness this armed confrontation between brother countries who, forgetting the deep ties that unite them, put on a show with their arms dealers. Wherever such a conflict exists, we admire antagonists disarm and resolve their dispute through negotiation, incidentally the only lead of the Charters of the Organization of African Unity and the United Nations.

We are indeed convinced that the duty of all people to avoid confrontation, to strengthen peace and seek what brings them together in a climate of harmony, the only guarantee of progress.

Our first steps upon taking in hand the destiny of this country were oriented in this direction. Indeed, our renovation work at the national level began July 5, 1973, called corollary a strong recovery in the hands of the interests of Rwanda and externally. For this reason, it was important as quickly as possible to end the tension that existed in our region, to establish an era of peace, good neighborliness, cooperation in all areas and leaving progress to which our respective peoples fervently aspire. We extended a friendly hand to our brothers and colleagues Heads of State ZAÏRE to UGANDA, and the BURUNDI TANZANIA who quickly realized the depth of our revolution.

Indeed, our frequent official meetings and our cordial relations, concrete regional projects in the works since the advent of the Second Republic, the peace that prevails at our borders and fraternal relations that bring our peoples testify eloquently, if necessary , of the path-in the right direction.

The effective institutionalization, there is a year of the Economic Community of Great Lakes Countries, by Burundi, Rwanda and Zaire addresses this concern for unity and cooperation that our people feel in their aspirations of all days more peace and progress. It is in this context that important decisions on economic cooperation, technical and financial within the C.E.P.G.L. taken especially during the recent summit in Bujumbura. Today Rwanda assumes the Chairmanship of Our Community, which must play a catalytic role in the process of unity and cooperation of the first founding states, and between them and their neighbors which is open .

It is in the spirit of complementarity of the people we felt a real joy and were happy to proceed with Our Brothers Burundi and Tanzania, to the creation of the Organization for Planning and Development Kagera river basin.

Our various visits and meetings as well as those of our Ministers in Kinshasa in Kabale, Bujumbura, Dar es Salaam, Kampala, Kigali, to name but a few, had no other purpose than to strengthen our close ties of friendship and cooperation. We have tried at every opportunity to bring all from the Second Republic, the testimony of his desire for understanding, peace and cooperation, only way to ensure the progress of all our respective peoples.

The policy of cantonment in isolation practiced by the leaders of the old regime had finally emptied of their contents the commitments we had voluntarily subscribed. Also, was it necessary to regain the credibility of our country in the international arena, which is in Rwanda today respect and consideration never equaled before.

It is for this purpose that beyond our neighbors, Rwanda has spared no effort to strengthen its cooperation with Member States of the African Common Organization and Mauritian, the renovation of which he contributed so much. Motivation that earned him the respect of his peers, and that drives us to an ongoing effort to realize the determination of our Organization to achieve the ideals of the Organization of African Unity which OCAM should be that a creative link.

Here, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, the spring behind our domestic and external policies and in which its place an integrated defense, ensured by a force that aims at nothing but peace, security and the well-being of our people. Thus understood, such a force constantly benefit from our care and help of friendly countries will always be welcome.

To all of you, Officers, noncommissioned officers, Corporals and Soldiers of the Rwandan Armed Forces,

We would particularly you our congratulations for their efforts during the past year to remain at the forefront of progress in our country. The guidelines set by the II1 'Republic and the National Revolutionary Movement for Development Manifesto remained the Line.

True to your commitment to protect all national family, you have embodied this belief by your cohesion and development actions you have taken to be an example to your fellow citizens. Be proud of being Rwandans and shoot your good works deep satisfaction that we share fully. But this assessment, although largely positive, does not fail to be in places isolated actions, worthy of a general disapproval. They are, in most cases, breaches of discipline and dignity. We wanted to bring remedies by warnings and adjustments, believing that education and persuasion effectively reduce the prodigal children in the right way. In desperation and to avoid contagion, we were sometimes forced to take drastic measures to improve the situation. This is what we continue to do against irreducible, unable to realize that discipline is the strength of our body.

However, these individual cases should not discourage those who, how many, remain on track. Instead, you should take the opportunity to continually improve your professional knowledge, your performance and personal discipline. Love your profession you have chosen freely. It's hard to leave without being exciting. 11 requires the goodwill and dedication, but it commands respect towards one who acquits himself honorably. To all those who are responsible for guiding others, we remind them that they have an urgent duty to care for their subordinates, to seek solutions to their problems and maintain the discipline through education and by 'example. No successful work is only possible if men are left to themselves, if the problems are beyond the responsibility or are known only superficially.

Firmness and dedication superior to their subordinates, obedience at all times on the part of subordinates, that is the way forward to continue to serve our country that we gave so much. We encourage you to persevere in the effort to further knowledge of your business but also for more active participation in improving vii conditions of our people.

Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, Activists, Activists,

The reflections of this day are intended only an awareness of the positive role that can play any body of society organized for this purpose. If we congratulate the armed forces for their conduct in general and their emotional contribution to the progress of our country, we also welcome other initiatives that have sprung many, and which give rise in turn to demonstrations of joy and satisfaction. We hope that these initiatives are more numerous, we call on all our wishes and will support with all our strength. Because the action of our Armed Forces should be on the national level, the symbol of the development of all our youth.

They should feel more committed all these young people from schools and hills!

It is high time their noticing departments responsible for national education and youth!

The intellectual development of our young people go hand in hand with the direction of their future responsibilities.

That throughout the country young people are awake to be involved in the effort. In short that youth should be active and enterprising. The future of Rwanda is the price.

And thanks to this perseverance in the pursuit of happiness and the brotherly understanding that Rwanda will contribute to world peace and progress of humanity.

Live the Rwandan people and its Armed Forces Vive Rwandan Youth, Long live the friendship between peoples.

