Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

On the anniversary of July 5, we are once again gathered here to protest, in joy, the joy we feel, to commemorate the three most important events of the contemporary history of our country and who are you all know, National Independence, the advent of the Republic and even the National Revolutionary Movement for Development Foundation. Three deeds that fit all in the revolutionary line reflecting the aspirations of the people of Rwanda as they have been affirmed through the National Revolution of 1959.

So for me, Rwandans, an obvious happiness to be with you on this day unforgettable, so we can together renew our common will to take on Rwanda to its true development, aided by all countries and agencies friends. I am now proud to re-express their representatives present at the festivities of the day, our sincere appreciation for the invaluable support they have continued to give generously to our effort, lending a hand with us their cooperation and friendship in our unwavering determination to consolidate national independence, through the achievements we lead, under the aegis of the national Revolutionary Movement for Development.

Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

The Rwanda today celebrates his birthday nineteen years of independence. It is indeed on 1 July 1962, that the sovereignty of our country was acquired dearly, you remember, after the great Revolution of 1959. 'It was at this time that the people of Rwanda regained its right to democracy and dignity, justice and freedom, as many inalienable prerogatives that had been long denied him by the feudal colonial regime.

Nineteen years have therefore passed since the rehabilitation of the Rwandan citizen in his human dignity and recovery, our country, its national sovereignty. important step that has enabled each and everyone, without distinction, to take over its responsibilities in the process of national development, and to be convinced of the need for a general mobilization of all children in the country, for achieving wellness of the Rwandan people who, thanks to his vigilance and maturity deserves therefore the joy and pride we feel in this day.

But the festivities of the Five in July also remind us that we must remain constantly ready to defend our dignity and sovereignty of our country. Also, and anxious to prevent the large Rwandan Revolution was led astray by the very people to whom the people had entrusted the power to guide and best serve, and, taking advantage of this position, tried the use for their own purposes by introducing lies and intrigue, we did not hesitate, on the night of July 1973 Five to defy hatred and division, intolerance and discord. We began doing to bring peace and harmony among all the girls and all the son of the country and promoted their cohesion, so that together they realize the goals and aspirations of the people as expressed through the National Revolution 1959.

For moral action of July 5, so we choked, with the enthusiastic support of all Rwandans, the attempted usurpation of power in favor of the selfish interests of a minority and have inaugurated with the advent of the Second Republic, a new era in which we are celebrating the 8th anniversary. We express well, through the festivities, joy and happiness that provide Peace and Unity, restored 8 years ago, and without which all actions for the betterment of our people, would never have been performed.

It is this trust, understanding and national accord that allowed the current mobilization of all the girls and all the son of our country, for the common and exhilarating work of economic, social and culture of the Nation. Completing this people mobilization mission, we wanted to institutionalize the action of July 5, the creation, in 1975, 6 years ago, the National Revolutionary Movement for Development. This movement wants the single framework for thinking and coordination, ensuring the combination of all our efforts, it is promoter of a genuinely Rwandan responsible democracy, promoting symbiosis of individual and collective freedoms.

Recognized and enshrined in our Constitution, as guarantor of the ideals of peace and unity, only necessary conditions of national progress, the National Revolutionary Movement for Development and is the gathering place for all the living forces of the nation and that the only force which inspires our actions. He realizes this fact, the pooling of all efforts of the people, without discrimination, without distinction of origin, ethnicity or any other criteria that can serve as divisive at the expense of the common good.

Also, the 6th anniversary of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development also he offers the celebrations by which we manifest solemnly today, the pride of a people united in peace and responsible for its development.

And in this day of celebration, we are compelled to renew our support feelings toward our brothers and sisters who have not broken the constraints of hatred, racial prejudice, ethnic or tribal and persecution, our brothers and sisters who remain in the grip of discrimination, they are victims of colonial tyranny.

On the occasion of these circumstances that we remember the liberation of our people, reiterate our unshakable faith in the cause of the Organization of African Unity and the United Nations and our firm will to work for the advent of an era of peace, free from oppression, an era of justice, freedom and solidarity.

The satisfaction of having maintained peace and unity through the vicissitudes of our young history, is probably the main reason for this celebration. Despite some aberrations like those we have had to deplore repeatedly, which could threaten the peace for which we fight so much, we are compelled today to congratulate ourselves that peace and tranquility prevail today our cities and on our hills, allowing all the activists and to all activists to go about their business, devoting their strength to the goal only to improve their well-being individually and collectively.

Activists, Activists, I acknowledge and regret with you, our political serenity was somewhat sullied by some immoderate ambitions that drove some of our compatriots to the destructive selfishness, ingratitude and betrayal.

Some are asking the legitimate question after that would have been reserved for this file opened in April 1980 in charge of a group of people who wanted, through assassinations, fires, poisoning and banditry, overthrow the established powers.

As you might expect, this is a particularly complex issue; it was necessary, therefore, to the competent judicial authorities more time and more attention to lead, as thoroughly and completely as possible, investigations could provide judges with lights needed to discover the truth in this case.

It is in these conditions that some people were, in the month of May releases because no proof of guilt was never established their dependents and that in contrast, accomplices still at large were arrested because these investigations were to reveal them against the existence of serious evidence of guilt. As you know, the instigators of disorders have unfortunately used these operations to spread false rumors in order to create a climate of insecurity within the population.

Here, it took a timely and specific intervention of officials to restore calm by saying that honest people should not worry about anything, only the guilty would be prosecuted according to law.

I would like to take this opportunity to again call on all the Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development asking them to redouble their courage and vigilance in the unit to vigorously resist all elements looking to the distract their development path and to fight effectively against the scourge of banditry.

Now the folder in question is ready for trial; when I speak to you, it has already been brought before the competent court, that is to say, in this case, the Court of State Security. It is up to the latter to determine, within a reasonable time, the date of the hearing, to know the whole truth about this conspiracy. Let us trust Justice.

Yes, I appeal again to all good citizens to help us to recover our brothers and sisters lost, of how they too can contribute to the consolidation of peace to us so dear, instead of disturbing , to fight for their well-being, instead of pouring into delinquency. I know you like me yearn for peace and public tranquility and your determination will overcome all these misdeeds.

About banditry, I would especially draw attention again to all Rwandans and all officials, on the fact that the crime can not be solved only at the level of prosecution. It is probably necessary to punish, but it is more important to correct and prevent. Among the root causes of this deplorable situation is generally cites rural underemployment and lack of arable land, causing the mass exodus of hungry youth and unskilled, the wellness concern, perversion, the example of those who have enriched themselves by dishonest means, such as tax fraud, embezzlement and fraud of all types and corruption. There is no doubt of it, and probably many other factors.

I therefore invites all relevant authorities, prefectural safety committees and the National Commission for fight against crime to make every effort to combat these phenomena at the base, that is to say, in all their root causes and many they can discover and analyze for their eradication.

I must also reiterate that the fight to lead in this framework is not a matter for public authorities alone. The primary interest to all activists and all activists cells, sectors and municipalities, starting with parents who are responsible for providing the best education to their children.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

Besides the peace and unity we have managed to keep up to date, it should be fully satisfied with the positive results of our political action resulting in particular, in the effective and sustained democratization of our institutions. The creation of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development in 1975, the constitutional referendum and the presidential elections in 1978 and the establishment of Communal Councilors and National Revolutionary Movement organs Development at municipal level and prefecture in 1980, constitute essential milestones on the path to full and genuine democracy.

I have already said here that this effort will be continued and that the Rwandan people will soon elect its representatives to the National Development Council. The 3rd Congress of the Movement, in his last seating from 17 to 21 December last year, decided himself holding the elections at the same time he fixed the guidelines and directions needed to set in place of a legislative body that takes really care responsibilities in the interest of the nation.

So Militants, you will soon have to choose freely, before the end of this year, 1981, among the candidates, in conscience, to be felt worthy to represent you and as you feel best able to assume valid within the National Development Council, the heavy responsibility to provide the country with legislation in line with Rwandan People's aspirations and of a nature to enable it to better carry out its progress in peace and unity. I can only encourage you to wear your choice on people, capable, honest and actually acquired the ideals of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development. Refuse to vote for those who preach hatred and division, or just want a way to get rich at the expense of the common good. I remember back to those candidates who pursue such designs as the process of democratization that we are committed to complete, can not be an opportunity to laziness or easy money and that the exercise of political office has meaning only insofar as it leads to promoting the interests of the people.

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

Democratization and stability of our institutions are perhaps, with peace and national harmony which are the necessary foundation, the best guarantor of true development. It is through these National Revolutionary Movement-key ideas for development that we can be proud today, diverse and important achievements in all fields.

It is beyond my intention here to repeat any assessment of achievements. I had indeed the opportunity, at the last Congress of the Movement, to prepare for you a more or less complete inventory of actions in the framework including four missions assigned to the Second Five-Year Plan for Economic, social and culture for 1977-1981 years. The interim evaluation of the implementation of this plan gives us hope and satisfactory results while demonstrating that the path that will lead us to the total development of the nation is still long, she encouraged each of us to even greater efforts and devotion to the common cause.

Also, is for me a pleasant duty to reiterate my satisfaction Militants for the efforts you've made, particularly in the context of UMUGANDA to keep Rwanda, our country, in the way of its wellness. The results obtained prove sufficiently that we all understood this basic principle of our movement that we control rely primarily on our own strength.

The Five of July celebration is also a favorable opportunity to engage the public officials of all kinds and of all categories to be guided in their private and professional life, by the qualities of selflessness, dedication, discipline, militancy and loyalty to the national institutions, provided that they should be they are the backbone of the defense of the integrity, security and independence of the nation and the promoters of the interests of the people whom they are bound by the oath of allegiance. Let them fight laziness and abandonment that blunt in some of them the spirit of commitment to the country. They struggle against the inordinate thirst for money that generates corruption, extortion and other such misdeeds.

I would like to remind about various public and private leaders and especially the highest authorities of this country, the population expects of them, coaching and encouragement for the best result of his efforts. One of the key ideas of the Second Republic has always been maintaining close contacts between the leaders and the people, to prevent, through dialogue and mutual enrichment, the danger of partitioning, detrimental to our common endeavor.

The lanes were clearly marked for finding solutions to the many problems that oppose our development. The Constitution, the mainstay of all the power of the state guarantees "freedom to express opinions on all matters." The National Revolutionary Movement for Development states that "in all meetings of the Movement, the free expression of opinion is guaranteed." Myself, I have always sought the views and advice of anyone who wants to honestly and with dedication, make its contribution to the work of seeking common progress of the whole nation.

I have never been hostile to hear suggestive voice, even when they are against my personal opinions. The dynamism of national life instead recommends solicit and listen to them. Also we can create an atmosphere where democracy, discipline voluntary and sincere search for truth and unity of action.

I do not hide this fact my real disappointment, noting in this area, the deplorable and worrisome relaxation that still prevails among most leaders who yet have the guidelines to approach the people and their collaborators, including through meetings and regular contact cell service, to jointly seek viable solutions to the problems that are bound to exist in any human organization.

So I have to invite again all concerned officials in implementing this policy of dialogue and constant contact, often listening and following their subordinates regularly through visits and timely advice, the progress of projects they are responsible.

They always keep in mind the recommendation that I addressed them on 31 December 1979 as follows: "It is important now that, from largest to smallest, the various authorities responsible for the continuation of projects, just waiting the initiative of the President of the Republic, to rush into disaster, to project implementation places, to provide explanations and often fragmentary embarrassed. "I remembered then to some and to others, Ministers and Officials leaders, that they have a duty to monitor constantly, daily, the course of the spring of their industry projects. for my part, I never départirai me of the importance I attach to this kind of contact with the people.

I have already mentioned, in other circumstances the slogans launched each year are chosen because of their impact on economic and social development, and primarily for their beneficial effect on the improvement of living conditions of the population rural. I have not hidden either, the truth that so fixed programs may not result in a single year.

This shows the importance we attach to the monitoring and proper implementation of projects designed to their completion.

These projects therefore require constant attention of leaders and peoples concerned. The year 1981 was proclaimed home "Year of Rural Water." When you know that over 95% of our population lives in rural areas and that we remember that such a result is globally the the objective of an entire decade devoted to the Water Supply and Sanitation, one can not reasonably expect that all the inhabitants of our country have, at the end of this year of sufficient water, in quality and quantity.

In this as in all others, we must not rely on miracles, but on the continuous efforts of the authorities and the population, efforts we seek to support, through a comprehensive and effective international cooperation. Thus, the Year of the Rural Water reaches its essential purpose, since, in the end, it will have laid the foundations for a comprehensive policy, intended to ensure the rational and coordinated all our water resources for meeting the present and future needs of all sectors of development, starting with the improvement of hygiene and health of the rural masses. So the first task of all concerned services and especially, that of the National Committee for Water and Sanitation that was created for this purpose.

While it is too early to take stock of the National Year of Rural Water, it still pleases me to report to present some initiatives already incurred during the first half. For multiple contacts, in fact, local authorities were aware of the problems related to the acquisition of drinking water for rural populations. Some municipalities have already gone ahead and hired the fountain to especially keep in good repair existing structures. The continuation and acceleration of project "Development of small sources" under the support of UNICEF remained at a satisfactory pace as the Government provides for the creation of 1,000 new sources in this year. Alongside these actions limited in scope, we face continuing or starting of large-scale projects of specific interest to the rural world such as global Icyanya, drinking water supply of the island Nkombo and Mayaga South . It goes without saying that in this complex sector, problems abound arise. These problems are mainly related to the lack of a technically trained staff in sufficient numbers, within the departments responsible for rural water sector.

The Rwandan Government is aware of these difficulties. Also, is it decided to support by yourself and help countries and agencies friends, the efforts of the population in this key sector. Thus it has allocated this year, amounting to 150 million francs in its budget to help the achievement of program objectives.

I ask the National Committee for Water and Sanitation to make every effort to determine the appropriate formulas for better management of resources and hydraulic structures in rural areas and meet the basic elements for making "d a water Master Plan "as well as the development of a program of training and retraining of personnel required. It goes without saying that the success of these actions requires the contribution of each and every one of you, especially those who are responsible for training the population and raise awareness of respect more than in the past, the heritage are the well equipped for books and ensure a safe and adequate water.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

Projects or annual targets referred are actually light use of a set of program necessarily inspired by the National Development Plan.

You will recall in this regard that, at the 3rd National Revolutionary Movement for Development Congress, we defined the basic principles of the Plan and identified the essential missions and objectives that we want to undertake. The details of this plan, mainly focused on the goals not achieved under the current programming are now about to be developed by the competent authorities, who took care to require your opinions and considerations, in accordance with our policy of dialogue which means that the national development planning is the work of the people themselves. I am therefore unable to give you today the detailed plan of all the actions that will be contained in our next development plan.

He nevertheless enough for me. Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, issue intended design services of the 3rd National Development Plan 1982-1986, some recommendations which they can dispose in this orientation work of our efforts over the next 5 years.

A reflection on the provisional results of the II Plan confirms indeed the wise choice of the main tasks assigned to it, namely:

meeting the food needs of the population, promoting a better use of human resources, improvement of individual and collective living conditions, improving Rwanda's position vis-à-vis the outside.

The link between the IInd and the IIIrd Plan will be ensured by the fact that these missions proceeded, it was five years ago, analysis of major structural handicaps the development of our country, yet now are some of the guidelines our planning system. But it is important to adjust the development strategy taking into account the evolution of certain parameters socioeconomic. The volume of information collected at the end of the III Congress of Our Movement and the consultations conducted last May in all prefectures of the country will allow animators services of this sector to better define achievable goals during the period considered.

Recall, as already pointed out in my speech the 3rd National Revolutionary Movement for Development National Congress, these main guidelines aim:

self-sufficiency in food quantity and quality, promotion of employment generating income with which to meet basic needs, an instruction that allows everyone to play a full role in economic and social life, and safe housing having a minimum level of comfort, improving the health status of the population.

To meet these guidelines, various sectors must unite their efforts in the enhancement of our natural resources and raising the technical level cadres and the public, to ensure a structured endogenous development from the bottom high.

In this context, self-sufficiency in food quantity and quality involves reducing constraints to the development of our agriculture. This is among other limited areas of arable land, agro-forestry-pastoral balance that remains to master as well as the allocation balance of land, financial and technical resources between food and industrial crops export one hand, and on the other, all other rural development projects components. The orientation of our actions over the next five years will have to bear particularly on improving productivity, especially of the food agriculture sector returns.

In order to achieve a structured endogenous development from the base, it is important to coordinate and boost management structures particularly in rural areas. To this end, the Community Centers Development and Continuing Education are the crucible for the Coordination of animation-extension. The infrastructure and equipment available to them must be developed in all municipalities and their management implemented at the prefectural and national level.

Efforts must also be focused on the processing sector of mainly agricultural products. The latest statistics tell us that the Rwandan land undergo intolerable pressure with a density of 380 people per square kilometer cultivable.

To prevent an explosion, it is our last chance to look for jobs that alleviate this pressure. Our efforts should therefore focus on identifying the greatest number of possible industrial projects. I urge Rwandan investors to overcome the shortsighted speculation on trucks, construction of houses, to engage in the area of ​​the creation of small industries, decentralized, primarily for agriculture. I invite all funding agencies to create the conditions to launch the sector.

Known issues with our companies are often from their management that interferes with good profitability of investments and hence their potential for development. Also, the focus there will be on training tailored for industry executives and entrepreneurs and their management controllers for both the public and private sectors.

Annual growth in production requirements even worse energy the volume of our imports and deforestation of our country. All possible forms of energy production on site must be operating in particular by the rapid value program bogs and deposits of methane gas in Lake Kivu and the equipment and connection to the network National maximum waterfalls.

The development of the use of solar energy will benefit from our support and subject to further studies for short-term aim of gradually a certain autarchy in energy.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

If I wanted to emphasize the importance of the cooperation of all citizens in the design and implementation of the next National Development Plan is that I am convinced that the Rwandan people must at all costs be the artisan and the real beneficiary. In this way, and if we succeed this bet, we will be even more proud that the Second Republic and its leaders have materialized even better, the slogan of our Movement that requires collaboration and consultation at all levels, both in the design and implementation of projects in the research interest of the majority, that is to say essentially the pursuit of greater profit of the toiling masses of the countryside.

It is with these sentiments that the Central Committee of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development and the Government held to review, this year, the national tax and customs policy, to suit the watchwords of Our Movement devotes his Manifesto as one of its fundamental principles the subordination of individual interests to the interests of the community, and this, in strict respect of individual property as guaranteed by the Constitution of the Republic. It is for these reasons to ensure fiscal justice and fairness that the Government has made the establishment of the patent system that will allow the state to break the subtle maneuvers and selfish, leading to fanciful statements income. With this new tax policy, the government wanted to encourage further the nonprofit organizations in their generosity and contribution to the wellbeing of the population.

Thus, we decided to give them the benefit of the tax exemption, provided they present annually to the Government a plan incorporating achievements in the National Development Plan. Thus, due to the tax and customs policy recently adopted by the Government and which must necessarily be added, austerity and orthodoxy in the management of state assets and the recovery of its claims, we believe we can meet the necessary conditions, easing the tax burden of low-income citizens, ensure distributive justice, promote circulation by priority, on the domestic market, the majority of consumer products and finally consolidate public finances.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

On the occasion of the festivities that we have gathered here, I would like to draw your attention and that of all the officials of national progress on some areas that must be for us a matter of constant concern: the rural development and health, education, opening and urban development.

There is no need to be remembered that the overwhelming majority of our population lives in rural activities. The first task of all our development plans should concern all, the promotion of the rural sector, to ensure a healthy and sufficient food to our people and to provide an abundant occupation to our youth. This is due to the importance we place particular to increase and diversify food production and promotion of livestock. We can not, on pain of dangerously mortgaging the future of our people, ignore the current situation around the world where people suffer horribly from malnutrition. Our consciousness to integrate us in control of our country's development strategy, a genuine food plan that can be assigned to each municipality and production objectives, storage and marketing, taking into account, this means, agro vocations -climatiques each region.

In this way, we will have made the bet that we ordered, that of ensuring our people a sufficient and varied diet likely to provide the necessary force him allowing him to perform for his greater good, the collective development from his country.

The order has been given for that in order to support this effort, the ways being studied, enabling fast implementation mechanisms for the organization of Crédit Agricole.

Other actions in favor of rural development, health promotion, is also part of the first priorities. You know that the international community has set itself the goal of total coverage of health needs for all inhabitants of the globe in 2000. While we are proud of the achievements made by our own strength in this area this goal will only be fully achieved if we agree an extra effort to overcome our current shortfall in health facilities, medicines and medical personnel and intensify our action, in terms of social and health education, especially in the areas of nutrition, prevention and maternal and child health, in favor of the poorest sections of the population.

Similarly, our rural development programs or any short development would still be random if a coherent and realistic program was not adopted in population and population planning. Raising the standard of living we seek implies that population planning is taken into account in the overall process of economic, social and cultural. There is hope that the activities of the National Office of Population and other relevant departments will, in this regard, the development of a coherent policy to find and maintain a beneficial balance between population and domestic production. Thus, combined with a constant effort to work on the part of all children in the country, this additional program will help us ensure that our people, healthier lives.

The other key area that I think is now our attention is that of education. The bulk of this has probably already been said on other occasions. Since the advent of the Republic Even, indeed, we have continued to stigmatize the inadequacy of our educational system to national realities. We then amply justified the reform undertaken thereafter to end this situation and ensure the needs of our economy in skilled labor and middle and senior technical staff, while satisfying the basic education needs of all the citizens. The steps and modalities of school reform themselves have been discussed and clarified on many occasions. The Manifesto of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development tells us himself that: "In order to promote a technically capable elite, morally balanced and mindful of the interests of the nation, the Movement has set the following objectives:

train conscientious men, equally adept at manual labor that intellectual work; guide instruction and education of youth in order to allow it to integrate into the production system or continue training in accordance with the vocation of each and the needs of society ".

The education reform has begun; she met and meet with understandable difficulties for a work of this magnitude.

I remind officials of Education what I said January 8, 1979, when I asked to implement school reform wisely, involving constantly, teachers and parents, to ensure that this program is well understood by the very people who must execute and to proceed in a timely manner, potential adjustments deemed necessary. Ongoing evaluation is also necessary so that in the long journey of education reform, not be proportional to the capacity of the Nation for each step. I invite all the authorities involved in the reform of our education to convince more the need for success. Failure in this regard would be catastrophic effect, not only because we would have unnecessarily spent significant funds for its implementation, but also and especially because we then return to an educational system that we have all condemned and still condemn.

It goes without saying that the success of such action, as vast as delicate, will be honored for all Rwandans who are called to participate. But I did not forget to reiterate that beyond this professional and civic training of our youth, we must also continue to strengthen the special education programs for youth not attending school or quit school and for the people adult, particularly in the context of the National Revolutionary Movement for development of cells, literacy centers, civic service to youth, youth training centers and communal development and continuing education centers. The economic well-being and social that we seek must at all costs involve all Rwandans without exception.

This is why, in favor of each other, the Ministry of Youth and Sports, in agreement with the Ministry of Social Affairs and Community Development and the various prefectural authorities and local, must be concerned today ' hui more than before, the problem of the youth care facilities which the school benches and in the after-school centers, will have had the chance to benefit from training and information and which, thus, require much more insistently, the conditions for development and integration in the system of national development.

Another point I wanted to emphasize today is the opening up of our country. The Rwanda suffers indeed, in the matter of a double handicap: its distance from the sea and its mountainous geography, all of which seriously hamper international trade and contacts between the various regions of the country. It is necessary therefore to improve and diversify access routes to the sea and to increase our transportation system inside, to allow a better flow of people and goods. It is also necessary to give full importance to the establishment of rural road networks, undertaken particularly in the context of UMUGANDA, and must link the sectors and municipalities. It is in this spirit that we wanted to create national transport companies, and we have continued to maintain the best relations with our neighbors, the Netherlands and Organizations friends, for they bring us their support to the achievement of major roads.

To support this development, we must also maintain our policy of good neighborliness and active diplomacy. You know that in foreign policy, I always first and advocated a policy of good neighborliness, and that sometimes you also know, the price of some criticism and some sulking. I have always sought to inform you of my political intentions. I then in this area, as in many other of the national life, follow the path of my conscience and the approval of the majority of Rwandans. No criticism or disappointment could not turn away. I also said that in this sector, "we want diplomacy and non-alignment policy, research-based international peace, fruitful cooperation and friendship, not a verbal or superficial friendship, but sincere friendship, cooperating and efficient. "

If I held Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, to expand on this area is that I wanted to ask each of us, starting with municipal and prefectural authorities, to convince the the importance of the communication network as a factor of exchange and therefore also as an instrument of cohesion and development. Our efforts must therefore compete domestically in the construction of new local roads where the need arises, as well as regular maintenance of existing ones.

My Speech Program of 8 January 1979, I directed the Department of Public Works to continue maintenance of roads and foremost improve the main roads that allow interregional trade and that bind us to our neighbors. I asked at the same time the Ministry of Posts and Communications to tackle the improvement of communications with both outside and between prefectures, municipalities and other centers of production and development .

Modernization, extension and maintenance of facilities and transportation networks and communication remains a major imperative for the smooth running of the National Economy, including the beneficial effect that this sector product on the industrialization of our countries and market our products.

Another theme I have seen fit to bring to your attention today is the urban development in our country. You all know in fact that the development of our cities, which began shortly after the national independence, took place in a disorganized, without plan and pace defy prediction. This resulted in the initiation of expropriation that deprived the population of fertile land suitable for agriculture, which resulted to injuries of insecurity in the installation of not adequately insured urban residents to permanent housing system. It has led to abuse, theft and speculation. He placed the government in a position where it has become difficult to implement community-based infrastructure and which, electrical installation, the supply of water and the location of markets.

To remedy this situation, order is now given to the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, in agreement with the Minister of Public Works, to identify, without delay and once and for all the dwellings in the urban areas, to create social plots to be allocated for free as part of our habitat promotion policy, and make arrangements for the creation of access roads. Thus, the Government may terminate the continual movement which is the subject of urban population. To this end, I wish that exemplary sanctions be taken against state officials and municipal councilors who constantly guilty of theft, extorting donations in cash and kind, to city residents to keep intact their homes. To these, I ask to refuse credence to these operations officers and profitarisme

To this end, I would remind you that the National Revolution of 1959, confirmed by National Independence, the advent of the Second Republic and the creation of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, banished forever the reign of intrigue and the exploitation of man by man. Also, should we fight relentlessly against the feudal survivals and any tendency to make the granting of services, yet mandatory and paid to the perception of any kind of unintended benefits yet often required. I ask each of noticing, because the return to these mores and outdated practices dangerously threatened the freedom and peace that aspires annihilate our people and the development efforts we have conducted and we celebrate here the benefits.

Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

I would like to reiterate our sincere belief that Rwanda will be developed primarily by the joint effort of his own children. All the achievements which we welcome throughout the festival are primarily the result of the commitment of all Rwandans in this joint action.

The Feast of the Peace and National Unity we celebrate at this time must strengthen in the hearts of all Rwandans, the deep conviction that their country will be developed thanks to their tenacity, their courage and their labor .

Also, should we rise as one man and to pool our strengths to achieve national progress. To achieve and realize the slogan of our Movement, we must all carry on united front, a fierce struggle against laziness, parasitism, crime, idleness and depraved morals. Each of us must prove his activism and work for the extirpation of the mentality of Rwandans, the aftermath of the antiquated feudal society, so that all are engaged in their heart to development tasks, the only guarantee of progress and betterment be one of them. I must remind currently in the vigilance of all officials, the fight without thank you that they must deliver against any tendency to perversion of our youth, created by some foreigners it is important to identify and hunt our country, and to fight against the opening of drinking establishments and consumption of alcohol during working hours.

Each of us, an official of the state, private sector agent, entrepreneur, businessman, farmer, craftsman, all are invited to get down to work and devote our energies to the development of our interests and promote our Country. But beyond these necessarily binding measures, we must convince the nobility of work and the moral obligation it represents for each inhabitant of this country.

We know that in this regard, he assured work to achieve its own development, each of us, regardless of social position, regardless of the position he holds in the public or private sector, is called to put all his strength to serve the nation and that by doing so, it deserves praise and reward.

It is in this context that the Second Republic held to establish service decorations intended for the public or private agents who, through their dedicated service, courage and honesty have given their country the best of them -Same. Also, it is nice to me, today, on behalf of all Rwandans to return to those of you supporting the requirements, the service medal or decoration in domestic orders.

These decorations are not intended only to public sector employees. The legislation provides for the agricultural merit decorations and breeding of Merit decorations socio-economic or cultural, as well as heroism decorations, designed to reward outstanding results, obtained in one or both of these areas and can be exemplified. Thus, farmers and other operators of the above sectors are they here before you to enjoy the decorations they have earned. These ceremonies mean that everyone will thus share appreciation it deserves, because of his outstanding participation in the noble task of the development of his country. I address to each recipient and bright my warmest congratulations.

Peace and National Unity, friendship and cooperation among peoples: this is the underlying motivation of the festivities that we are commemorating this Day of Peace, which reminds us of both our total commitment to Peace and National Unity and our determination to work for the development of our country and the consolidation of national independence, as many objectives that constitute the bedrock of our action and the purpose of the national Revolutionary Movement for development and for which all of us, and Activists activists are called to devote all our efforts to build a prosperous nation and the consolidation of an international society more just and fraternal.

Live Peace and National Unity Peace and live your Cooperation between Peoples.

