Militants of the MRND, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

The day of October 26, Armed Forces Day, we once again offer the opportunity to meet us not only among compatriots, but also with some of our friends who today honor us with their presence.

They came as neighboring countries as distant countries among those who welcomed and even encouraged the will of good neighborliness and opening Even Republic.

We appreciate this mark of friendship, we are confident that the good right of those who seek peace and understanding between peoples, rather than cultivating the seeds of tension and conflict.

We wish you a pleasant stay in our country, and ask you to renew our sentiments of esteem and affection to all our friends that you represent.

Militants of the MRND, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

The Feast we celebrate today, already become traditional, is placed every year under the sign of remembrance and renewal. difficult moments of remembrance, tomorrows uncertain and even heroic times for less skeptical; Remember also the will to survive and succeed, remember the sacrifices, sometimes poorly known, but rewarded with renewed satisfactions that were part of the frame of the events that have marked the life of every day of the Rwandan people and its Forces since our first steps in national sovereignty.

October 26 is also a revival of celebration for all those educated in the past and drawing strength and vigor in the consciousness of duty, in a well understood discipline and voluntary, in an ongoing effort to challenge oneself , are forward-looking, optimistic and serene, instruments of peace and progress.

Thus the Armed Forces Day is a special time for the people and their leaders to further reflect on the place of choice and the importance of security in the country's development. Indeed, everything is fragile without security, no peace anywhere without peace hearts. All countries of the world have made this essential factor for the development of prime function. It would not occur to the mind of any state to stand out by giving up this shield, less than rely on the protection of others. For our part, we intend to grant the security of our people, the place it deserves in the measurement No. possibilities and with the help of our friends who understand also that security is an essential dimension of development.

Militants of the MRND, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

The living conditions of the present time that bode well for the future, provided that the momentum is maintained and the international economic situation gradually mastered, should every citizen of this country to take more and more aware of its capacity to influence peace and development of the country. For we must remember it, without peace, no progress, no progress, no improvement in living conditions, peace is precarious. These two closely related aspirations must remain the cornerstone of everything we do.

We've spent all our energy, especially after the historic date of July 5, 1973. The call to our compatriots was echoed by the Rwandan people as a whole Members of the Armed Forces and their compatriots are mobilized both fronts of peace and development and the results obtained, it would be tedious to list in this post, speak for themselves.

Those who wish can realize themselves, our country is open to all those who want to get in touch with our people and their realities.

As for us, we renew our encouragement to all the children of this country to continue hand in hand exalting their march towards progress, always having in mind that we must first 'rely on our own forces, the with our friends to serve as extra ".

Militants of the MRND, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

The Armed Forces backbone of our defense system, are still among the major concerns of the authorities. A significant effort was made to equip the Armed Forces of essential equipment and materials, to the extent possible given the country all the needs. The instruction and training are up to the tasks assigned to the Armed Forces. It is in this context that the Higher Military School, nursery executives of the Armed Forces, which, since 1960, year of its creation under the name of School Officers, was not legal, just obtain status primarily focused on the organization and strengthening of education to meet both the current requirements of higher education in our country and the essential criteria that must prevail in the formation of an officer.

In the same vein, the Government intends to proceed in the near future with the reorganization of all military education, the status of the Ecole Supérieure Militaire is a first step towards this goal.

Militants of the MRND, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

If we are entitled to congratulate ourselves for success in our development effort since the day of succession, so we can enjoy the peace that reigns over all our hills, so we are proud to have friends in several skies it is not that we intend to hide us episodic pitfalls in our path of development.

Our country has repeatedly been confronted with difficulties of various kinds which had the beneficial effect of forging the character of his children.

Scarcely delivered from the yoke of the feudal-colonial secular regime, the young Republic of Rwanda was attacked by terrorists guided from abroad who undertook to disturb our daily lives. Once this threat dismissed by the vigilance and people's courage and his still nascent army, it was the turn maneuvers tired of politicians seeking a distraction from their distress in the divisions and hatred among the people.

The outcome of this chaotic climate was love moral state of 5 July 1973. The slogan was then launched: peace and national unity, discipline, dialogue. But it was not reckoned with the bad faith of the agents in the most hidden manipulation. Many of them, exhausted, got lost in the maze of intrigues.

For having refused to open and constructive dialogue, they have weakened the days and finally they let go as if they had enough to stand at arms: both their internal contradictions they weigh heavy. They are therefore engaged in subversive activities through a destruction program legally established powers.

As usual, the country took responsibility for stemming the proliferation of destructive forces.

The 3rd National Revolutionary Movement for Development National Congress has recommended that every effort to seat peace in our country. Justice and the whole apparatus of the state to ensure the implementation of this recommendation.

Militants of the MRND, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

I wanted to spare you this long retrospective of relatively recent events in our country, but it is important that everyone be convinced that the best way to participate in the development of our country lies in the work and dialogue. '

We are in a democratic country that wants to be: a framework for dialogue and cooperation exists at all levels; and each is entitled to their opinion, provided that the expression in the rule of law and others.

We do not claim that the system is beyond reproach, knowing that perfection is not of this world; but no one can ignore the fact that the democratization process has already come a long way. Began with the founding of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, it will soon be crowned by the election of deputies to the National Development Council. We recommend the people a choice conscious and responsible. We expect these representatives of the people they are promoters of development and not instruments of power struggles or special interests.

Thus a real responsible democracy will take root in our country; and the events of March-April 1980 will have been a new blip caused by misguided people putting their interests compete with the requirements of the common good.

Militants Members of the Rwandan Armed Forces,

I have on many occasions recommended to all to serve discipline and cohesion models for our compatriots. I've invited you to be vigilant at all times. I was able to recall many times that '' your role is not to create divisions in the country, you are the same national unity; because Rwandans are all brothers; he who does not believe can not be part of the Body of children which the country requires more dedication and self-denial. "

I you have always warned against the dangers of subversion orchestrated by enemies of peace, which always oppose these essential qualities that are called discipline and cohesion, honesty and integrity, love of duty and sacrifice as well the sense of honor and the desire to better serve, that "as in the past, the Rwandan Armed Forces continue to hold high the torch of peace and national unity in the common search of wellness people of Rwanda by total mobilization of all available energies "under the banner of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development.

I appealed to the military of all ranks for each day they till all these essential qualities that make the nobility of our career and above all the love of our fellow citizens and the rights of people. You know better than anyone how you answered these renewed calls.

I had also to congratulate and rejoice in the impeccable behavior of the majority, I had to express my deep appreciation for the good deeds performed by the Armed Forces for peacekeeping and to contribute to the development of Country.

I should like to reiterate once again, despite the regrets for those we have not in our ranks because they did everything to give us the slip, the action that together we have done for 21 years and particularly since July 5, 1973 is for me a source of joy, pride and more courage in the mission that the nation has entrusted to us. Persevere in the right way; obey your oath, do not give up the sublime ideal of devoting your youth to the Fatherland. This is the set that day at all those, most who have held firm that the conviction of being healthy again; without forgetting those who, having strayed, have the will and conscience to regain normal rhythm. What matters above all is the ability to face up to judge yourself the degree of his shipwreck and the extent of damage. To each to its balance sheet for a new start.

Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

The festivities of the day of our Armed Forces can not make us forget that in other parts of our continent and elsewhere many human people suffer in their flesh and in their soul treatments unworthy of human beings; they are deprived of the inalienable rights yet recognized by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

For us, the celebration of the Armed Forces, is the feast of peace. That is why it gives us an opportunity to reaffirm the essential principles whose observance is a certain danger against the world balance.

The Republic of Rwanda still maintains that the Namibian peoples fate of Western Sahara, Palestine should further concern to the international community and especially the big powers, they are guarantors of world peace.

The principles of peaceful coexistence and the peaceful settlement of disputes should be recognized and respected by all, by South Africa also threatens constantly paralyzing neighboring countries security therefore their development. Supporters of apartheid, which trample on the basic rights of the people, should realize the weight of their influence in this precarious balance of the international situation.

That savings would be to help the less fortunate if rich countries decide to limit itself so little, under international control, their run to the most sophisticated weaponry? Thousands of our fellow creatures die every day of starvation et.d'autres deprivation while fabulous sums are swallowed in the manufacture and purchase of the most lethal weapons. The aspiration to world hegemony of those who have the potential risk of lead humanity to its destruction.

As for the African brothers, we know they are all convinced that no development of the continent is conceivable in the division, without true unity can only be based on the agreement between all parts of the continent. What will happen if we put ourselves continually contradicts our most fundamental beliefs? The willingness of some leadership should give way to a permanent dialogue without interference in each other's internal affairs but rather respect for the sovereignty of each country.

Thus the peoples of Africa cease to be considered and treated as minors peoples. Thus the voice of Africa would be heard in the concert of nations. Thus, Africa's weight would be more felt in international forums. We appeal to all our wishes this era real unity, efficient, Africa for peace reign and prosper the friendship and cooperation between peoples.

Live the Rwandan people and its Armed Forces, live peace and understanding between peoples.

