Excellencies, Members of the Diplomatic and Consular Corps,

At the end of each year it is customary that we gather to congratulate ourselves on the progress made during the past year and make wishes for peace and harmony for the one starting.

I thank you greetings on behalf of you all, and to his own name, Dean just sent to my own person, my family and all the people of Rwanda. Also me I would allow my turn to speak on behalf of all the Activists and all the activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, our best wishes for happiness and prosperity for all of you, members of your families and all who are dear to you.

I would also like, through you, to ask you to convey to the Distinguished Heads of State that you represent our sentiments of highest esteem and appreciation for the remarkable way in which they take the destiny of their country at heart to guarantee every citizen's wellness. We are satisfied and aware of the efforts that your distinguished Heads of State repeatedly lead to cleanse international relations in order to create a new world where peace and mutual understanding.

As part of our relationship, the past year was characterized by a dynamic cooperation that we have achieved some of our development projects. Knowing the serious problems we face, and being yourself craftsmen of this cooperation, you will be our top performers to your respective Governments to enable them to increase their aid despite an unfavorable international economic environment.

You know the situation in Rwanda as part of the family of the least developed countries and that has to deal with precarious means to intractable problems often characterized by the persistence of inflationary pressures, the continuing deterioration of terms of trade the reduction of public aid. For the least developed countries, including Rwanda, had nourished great hopes for the Paris Conference; However, we are forced to note that the resource mobilization mechanisms to fund the New Substantial Action Program are not yet in place. The gap between rich and poor countries continues to widen. We arrive at the end of 1982 without any significant change can positively change this trend that the international community has repeatedly deplored for years. For 1983, I would not make a distress cry but my hope for a better future, hope that will materialize in a significant mobilization of resources and a massive contribution of all peoples through solidarity more active. The international community had to act in this spirit that the economic relations are more fair and balanced. We must be aware that the peace and security we all seek can not be established while the majority of the population of this land live in the worst conditions of poverty and malnutrition.

Excellencies, Members of the Diplomatic and Consular Corps, Ladies and Gentlemen, Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

In foreign policy, the Movement considers fundamental rule in relations between nations, peaceful coexistence and cooperation, while respecting the sovereignty of each nation. It is deplorable that the fratricidal conflicts, tensions homes, which pose serious consequences for international peace and security, are far from dying. In Africa, the Middle East, Central Asia people struggling for their inalienable rights die every day in the most despicable conditions. We have repeatedly condemned the heinous and cynical policy of apartheid, suffering and dramas of any kind imposed on the people of Namibia, the plans of the State of Israel to exterminate the valiant Palestinian people.

Rwanda, which is in favor of negotiations for the settlement of international conflicts, believes in the need for a more serene climate that would allow all nations to focus more on development. We therefore invite all States which remained until today deaf to repeated calls of the international community to abandon their selfish interests and let these oppressed people their freedom.

Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

The picture of the political and economic situation that I have painted seems bleak. This is why we must all fight for this land we inhabit is more hospitable to peace between men is established; the peace that is the prerequisite for development. As the manifesto of our Movement's request, we must defend the interests of man and society in dialogue leading a fierce fight against any tendency to question the primacy of the collective interest over individual interest. Peace and Unity for Development will always remain constant in our policy. We have done everything that we have peace in the country through our policy of national concord and peace on our borders through our neighborhood policy. While remaining vigilant in maintaining the gains of our revolution we must now fight for our development. This development will first be acquired by our own actions, our work and our commitment.

Increasing so all our production. Let every politician is impregnated further its mission to mobilize, manage and direct the working masses for their wellness. Every trader, businessman, industrialist better understand its important role in national development and devoted himself honestly. Each peasant farmer is striving constantly to increase production for his own happiness, that of his family and for the progress of the country.

In its meeting on 11 and 12 November 1982 to rehabilitate the Rwandan tradition and give value to the work and agricultural production, the Central Committee of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development returned the importance and role of everyone's work to increase domestic production. By introducing the harvest festival, the Central Committee called together all responsible to encourage Rwandans to increase production. We must produce more to eat better. This festival is 1 August each year. All work with routing, each following its always important and indispensable role in the collective progress in the consultation and dialogue.

In his message for the Day of Peace 1983, John Paul II says: "Dialogue for peace must be established first at national level, to resolve social conflicts, to seek the common good. While taking into account the interests of different groups of peaceful dialogue can take place constantly, through dialogue, in the exercise of democratic freedoms and duties for all, thanks to the participation structures and multiple instances of conciliation between employers and workers in how to respect and involve cultural, ethnic and religious groups that make up a nation. " The Manifesto M.R.N.D. was inspired by the same ideals and the same ideology.

Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, Activists Activists,

It is customary that every year we we set a primary goal in the priorities identified by our development plan. These efforts are always directed towards the rural world: increasing production, agriculture, education, home improvement, breeding, rural water, topics that required the national effort in recent years. The past year was dedicated to the fight against erosion. Some achievements in this area are visible. But the fight must continue. The coming year will be one of the tree. 'YEAR 1983 - YEAR OF THE TREE. " So reforest our denuded hills, planting trees along our roads. Reforestation for erosion control. Reforestation to reduce the risk of energy shortages. Reforestation for building materials. But as planting fruit trees to improve our diet. Each region following its potentials and its climatic and soil data.

The individual and communal initiatives must be raised. The state itself will provide support by helping local authorities to determine the areas to be reforested, specifying the species to favor, and securing existing and future reforestation management methods.

Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

The peace that we support for our people, we wish for all men. We are saddened to see the poor living conditions of refugees from the recently UGANDA and which have swept our country.

The Government, through bilateral discussions with Ugandaises authorities sought to find a final solution that takes account of international rules and basic rights of the human being.

The Government and the Rwandan People make a fitting tribute to the concern that the international community has shown with regard to these people, solicitude which materialized through the support material and logistical deployed for them following calls help, emergency humanitarian initiated by our country.

The echo generated by these calls resulted in a broad solidarity movement for the displaced.

Problems humanitarian and equipment posed by their influx in our country, whose resources are dramatically limited, however, remain valid and scale is such that Rwanda still relies on the generosity of the international community to cope .

In this regard, I urge the representatives of countries and international organizations accredited in the Republic of Rwanda to keep our loyal interpreters to all our partners and friends which we expect support that either match the needs inherent in this difficult situation.

The Rwandan Government is well aware that the circumstances call and require a solution that would go beyond immediate needs. For us, the conclusions reached following the negotiations already carried GABIRO between representatives of Rwanda and those of UGANDA, offer the way forward in the direction of such a solution.

It is in this context that we wish to the full implementation of the agreement reached between our two Governments then. This agreement covers Rwanda's commitment to return among the displaced, those who have been identified as Rwandan nationals, Uganda engaging in turn to do the same with regard to its own nationals.

I remain convinced that, guided by their ideals of solidarity and African brotherhood, in compliance with the imperatives of good neighborhood policy, both parties will define the ways and means to implement, as soon as possible, their commitments respectively.

Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen,

Rwanda has for its development, first of all on the efforts of his daughters and son, but the help of our friends still essential. We have to organize the 3rd Round Table of external aid. The findings were encouraging. So do we want that beyond the wishes and declarations, we received a substantial and effective contribution of countries and organizations to friends that the objectives of our 3rd National Development Plan a reality.

The year 1983 will also be an important year in terms of domestic policy. It was during this year that will be held the IV National Revolutionary Movement of the National Congress for the Development and will be held presidential and legislative elections.

I still wish you a happy new year to you, yours, the distinguished Heads of State and peoples you represent. May the year 1983, when the tree is for all of you a year of peace and progress.

