Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

On this historic day I have to go to all Rwandans, on the occasion of the solemn opening Development of the National Council, it is my duty to express to all the activists and to all activists, gathered in the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, a satisfaction sense for two reasons.

First to the climate of peace and national concord which reigns throughout the country. The Rwandan people have indeed understood that thanks to the peace and national unity that we can wage a struggle without thank you against underdevelopment.

Then, for this political maturity that the people of Rwanda has just proved, once again, by establishing democratically, the National Development Council. Indeed, Today's event marks the culmination of our efforts to democratize the national institutions of our country, with the National Revolutionary Movement for Development Manifesto and our Constitution. This process, initiated from our historical action of July 5, 1973, just materialize a body which, as I pointed out in my speech on July 5, 1981, will be "a great responsibility to provide the country with a consistent legislation the aspirations of the people of Rwanda and likely to allow it to better fulfill its progress in peace and unity. "

Activists, Activists,

Since the advent of the Second Republic, we promised the people of Rwanda to establish genuine democratic institutions that meet its current aspirations. Thus, in 1975 we set up a political party outside of which no other political activity may be exercised: it is the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, which is the logical outcome of the introduction of the unit once compromised. Also, our movement he fully realizes the ideals of the 1959 revolution, having proscribed separatism, the superiority of one race, one family to another. Our Movement has managed the accession of all the people in the great path of unity and peace.

After the founding of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, we have reached an important milestone in the annals of our country policy. It is the Constitutional Referendum and Presidential Elections. It is in fact 17 December 1978 that the Rwandan people overwhelmingly adopted the new Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda and that December 24, 1978, he was elected President of the Republic. Our Constitution guarantees public freedoms, protects the individual against anything that may harm their development and gives him and all the possibilities of working for the welfare of his family and the entire nation. The Constitution, in Article 7, confirms the existence of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, following the line traced by the manifesto of our Movement, including that of "defending the interests of man and society leading in dialogue a fierce fight against any tendency to question the primacy of the collective interest over individual interest or limited to a certain group of our society. ''

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

At our moral revolution, July 5, 1973, we took the decision to dissolve the National Assembly, the legislative power thus returning to the President of the Republic. We took this decision because the Assembly had failed in his duty and also because the geopolitical situation at the time, characterized by hatred, nepotism and regionalism, was harmful to the development of the country.

If today the National Revolutionary Movement for Development took over the organization of legislative elections since the selection process at the base until the campaign was to prevent the evils of division and discord that while competitors in search of votes, had sown among the Rwandan population.

This is to maintain the climate of peace and national accord established by the same Republic, the National Revolutionary Movement for Development took its responsibilities towards the nation.

Innovation will you certainly proved that the people of Rwanda fully exercise their freedoms and now he expects the new legislative training a catalyst support in its development efforts.

It is for these reasons that it seems important to me, when you begin your mandate, you remember some key ideas that should guide you throughout your work, hoping that they contribute to the success of our efforts for the welfare of our population.

Activists, Activists Members of the National Development Council

It returns you to develop legislation aimed must address the objectives we have set ourselves; objectives which are summarized in the integral development of our people.

Since July 5, 1973, we have done everything to create favorable conditions for effective legislative work.

Politically, we have established peace and restored national unity. National consciousness was developed through the work of our Movement and the determination of its Militants for the national development effort. Institutionally, the country, through the adoption of the Constitution of 17 December 1978 has established its own institutions to suit its underlying realities. Article 34 of the Constitution establishes the separation and cooperation of executive, legislative and judicial. It is in this specific context that concern for democracy that must characterize the discussions within the National Development Council, should be the basis of relations between the three powers.

Also, on the occasion of the establishment of the National Development Council, depositary institution of the legislature, it will be exercised concurrently with the President of the Republic, I would like to dwell a little on some constitutional principles that should guide your daily work.

The role of the National Development Council is essentially that of legislating. To do this, the Constitution provides that the members meet twice a year in ordinary session, and if circumstances so require, special sessions can also take place.

The schedule of sessions is imperative the program of the National Development Council activities must comply.

The Constitution also gives useful information regarding the operation and material organization of the work of MPs. It is, Militants, to clarify them further in an internal general regulation that will allow each of you to locate his intervention in a constitutional and regulatory context.

The due process in drafting legislation also needs to be emphasized.

As you know, the initiative of the laws belongs to the deputies and the President of the Republic. It would be regrettable that constituency work is limited to one review bills submitted by the President of the Republic without ever proposals' laws private members themselves.

The provisions of the Constitution constantly guide your action.

I remind you about the role of the Constitutional Court which is responsible for monitoring the compliance of laws passed with the provisions of the Basic Law.

Need I remind you also that the process of making laws is long, the constitution provided two emergency procedures enabling the President of the Republic to seek review of a bill whose adoption may be delayed.

According to Article 68 of the Constitution, the President of the Republic may indeed ask the urgency for the vote of a given bill. In this case the examination of the project will focus on the agenda of the National Development Council. Similarly, the Constitution allows the President of the Republic to legislate by decrees of taken by the Government Council.

Besides their function of legislating, members are competent to control the action of the Government. They do particularly annually adopting the general budget of the State, having approved the performance report for the current year. In this regard, the National Development Council is assisted by the Court of Auditors. The National Development Council also controls government action in accordance with Article 75 of the Constitution.

Militants Thus, the basic law gives you all the means to effectively discharge your duties.

But your role as catalyst for development that I stressed at the beginning of my presentation will take you to live, or at least to regularly return to your constituencies. I invite you to refrain from anything that may impede the action of local authorities, for such actions would result in regrettable divisions within the population.

This means that you have a duty to work in the sole consideration of the welfare of our people, regardless of regions, ethnic groups, as it once was.

Consciousness in the fulfillment of your duty (to insight and serenity in your discussions, conducted in an atmosphere of freedom of expression in the discipline, are assets that are the key to success in your task.

It is true that this freedom advocated by the Statutes of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development will expose you and to fully understand and clearly your views.

However this freedom should not extend beyond the normal limits of respect for your institution. In your work, you constantly have in mind the Constitution and the Manifesto of our movement, and it is to that extent that laws adopted have efficiency and strength. It is not enough to make laws, it must above all that they are applicable and meet the concern of a policy * st oriented development agenda and the search for concrete solutions to problems that the full installation development of our people.

Activists, Activists Members of the National Development Council

The entire Rwandan people have their eye on you. He waits for the confidence he has placed in you is not betrayed. Therefore, you must work for raising living standards. Your debates in this Council must refer to the socio-economic of the country. This is why we prefer the legislative body styling and revitalized "National Development Council." With the advent of the 2nd Republic, we opted for change. We want a dynamic and creative Council, able to revitalize our economy.

Questions relating to economic, social, political and cultural life must be considered and that to help achieve our targets set by our movement and especially those emerging from the recommendations of the Third Ordinary Congress held in Kigali from 17 to 21 December 1980 . .you You remember that at this Congress, I outlined to guide our actions and the objectives with our 3rd Five-Year Development Plan still in preparation.

The plan you have to consider and adopt, has been carefully prepared with the participation of the population, according to the recommendations issued at the 3rd Congress of our Movement.

Militants,

On 8 January 1979, I traced the program that my Government applied for the mandate entrusted to me by the Rwandan People, December 24, 1978 when he testified massively me confidence. For three years the program is launched. He keeps on; and objectives are defined always guide the actions of the executive, although it must be molded to the recommendations of the 3rd National Congress of our Movement and it will be even laws that will come from this meeting.

Activists, Activists,

Since the advent of the Republic Although, I did not hesitate to show you the many problems that Rwanda is facing: problems due to isolation, weakness of our resources, scarcity and low productivity of our land and rapid population growth. While highlighting these problems, I have told you that I was not going to work miracles. But I asked that the efforts of all Rwandans are mobilized to take our underdevelopment of the country. The Manifesto of the Movement teaches that "the place for every citizen of Rwanda, is the action which gives it its rights and freedoms."

Improving the lot of our people requires effective mobilization of resources, particularly human. It is with this objective that we have institutionalized the UMU-GANDA. In my speech at the opening of the 3rd National Congress of our Movement, I again reiterated my faith in UMUGANDA. Our progress is primarily the result of our own sacrifices. As I said at that time, each responsible in any level it is, must be convinced of its role of facilitator of progress and the obligation to promote even more the participation of all the UMUGANDA . As was so well recommended the 3rd Congress, it is the work of man's responsibility to be the key source of wealth creation in the country and therefore form the main vessel of economic accumulation. The National Revolutionary Movement for Development therefore gives all its importance to work and especially to manual labor as a value and as a primary source of economic prosperity.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

No development can be done outside of peace. The disorder kills, destroys, disunited hearts and makes them impervious to progress and any creative effort.

With the advent of the Republic Although we have brought peace and national harmony, which allowed us to mobilize the people for development. I always said that Rwanda will be developed by the combined efforts of his own daughters and son. We are proud that the Armed Forces have continued to carry the torch of peace and national unity in the common search of wellness of the Rwandan People, for a total mobilization of energies available in the discipline and devotion.

The peace and tranquility, even the foundation of the Republic, must be maintained and the spirit of understanding and unity between all the components of the Rwandan People; because it would be building on sand than construct a program without its strong pillars of peace and national harmony that allowed the people of Rwanda to achieve, since the historical date of July 5, 1973, all the progress he is right to be proud today.

The Armed Forces do départiront therefore, at any time of their essential role of guardians of peace and protectors of the people, allowing him to devote his forces in search of his wellness.

The training and the Armed Forces of the equipment will be a daily concern of leaders at all levels and discipline at all times and cohesion flawless. The military schools, including the Higher Military School recently renovated, will be organized to meet the demands of the training of officers and NCOs capable, competent and disciplined. Command will ensure that the armed forces are included in the Country of the development process in order to make a substantial real contribution.

The national territorial integrity, security and public tranquility and well-being of the Rwandan People therefore remain a constant concern of the Rwandan Army and Gendarmerie Nationale.

The country will still make sacrifices to provide its Armed Forces the tools essential to their mission.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

In all countries, especially the poorest, development has a political dimension: the performance level depend first and quality of the mobilization of all forces and other resources. The frame and support this mobilization are the National Revolutionary Movement for Development. The mobilization, sensitization and awareness of the masses for development are the constants of our Movement.

The structures of our movement will achieve the goals of development but to better achieve the training and regular retraining of members of cell committees are essential. The Ministry I'Intérieur in collaboration with the services of the National Revolutionary Movement of the General Secretariat for Development, should have effective means for the political ideology of our movement is rooted deeply in the daily behavior of our citizens. This political ideology must, as you know, be translated into facts, into concrete activities aimed at the development of the country and finally the development of man. Our Movement has condemned unreservedly inaction and laziness are the roots of poverty and can lead to reckless behavior such as banditry and vagrancy. Even the Republic has restored to honor the work, under which ennobles man and gives him his dignity, is for him a source of wealth and prosperity.

The town must remain a body made up of several cells alive and dynamic. And like any living body, the common needs of several elements for it to be able to render service to the population that inhabits it. The Commune, the basic unit of our development and our economy has been restructured so that it can better fulfill its mission, which is to boost the lifeblood of the country for their wellness. The Interior Ministry should ensure that the mayors are still up to their tasks, the main one being that of consolidating peace and national unity in their common and to be catalysts of development. The UMUGANDA must be better organized to serve as the development of the municipality and the community in general. The training of municipal staff, both politically and technically, will be a constant concern of the Government. The City can not develop if it does not have capable managers, aware of their situation and their duties towards the population and huge desire to eradicate hunger and poverty in their City.

The consolidation of municipal finances must be pursued. I know that some towns have very limited resources, but unfortunately also notes that the management of these resources is poor. Prefects will ensure that the financial control of municipal accounting is regular and strengthened to show the leaders of towns in the most rational way possible to manage their assets and enhance their financial capabilities *.

The last Congress of Our Movement has recommended that the Government provide more support to municipalities, beginning with the poorest. The Government is already aware of this issue, which is why he created the Municipal Development Fund to finance many projects recommended by the Municipal Action Plan, which can not be executed only by the efforts of the people and lean Municipality's budget.

Despite the still low compared Fund resources to the many community projects to achieve, we are forced to admit that the FDC is a beneficial institution. During the four years of its existence, a number of community projects were funded. It is especially important that these projects directly benefit the rural population, actress and beneficiary of development. The population itself has contributed greatly to these achievements through community work UMUGANDA that represent a significant share of these investments.

The Government will continue this effort to supply a substantial fund so that it can increase its response capabilities.

The Rwandan Constitution in Article 11 provides the legal personality Prefecture. In the tours that I made last year in all prefectures of the country, the prefectural Congress have expressed the desire to see this provision turn into reality. We chose this wish and legislation will be proposed to satisfy him.

The achievement of political objectives therefore requires mobilization and entertainment of the masses. I have already explained the meaning of animation advocated by the National Revolutionary Movement for Development. I get tired point to, especially for those who in bad faith, refuse to hear and understand.

February 14, 1978, at a meeting that I held with state officials in the capital, I explained that '' no one can act if it is animated. Animate is to give life, it's light, it's finally starting, give the Movement. It is important first of all to animate the movement in ourselves, we soak its principles and ideals. Continue this first revolution by an inner impulse. This is the main aspect of the animation. But this revolution must also be externalized. Sing what we believe and what we have hope. The outdoor entertainment, so soak up the ideas of the movement by an educational action. The animation is, on this aspect, a mobilization tool. I take this opportunity, however, to assure you that my wish is that the animation is not any personality cult nor meaningless slogans. "

In traditional Rwandan culture, men, women and children have always had the opportunity to externalize their joy and belief in different forms (the dances, pastoral poetry, songs etc ...). These various demonstrations had goals for the initiation of young people in Rwandan culture and the opportunity to achieve and maintain continuity.

The words contained in these various events were very significant, whether, for example, to rent the conquerors of popular education to the bravery and valor, or abundance of the harvest for encouraging those who are engaged in the fields.

Currently, the Rwandan company did not break and can break this noble tradition, and the ideas contained in the Manifesto of M.R.N.D. fit into this context when precise: "The development of the Rwandan culture will be directed towards the formation of the committed man, proud of his country, released from the legacy of feudal customs, any complex and prejudice Also. the sleek Rwandan culture of all that opposes the strengthening of national unity and progress of the Rwandan Company will be popularized. "

To put these ideas into practice, the Central Committee of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, at its meeting on June 30, 1977, said the design of the animation as:

"A externalization of our commitment to the ideals of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development and as a revaluation factor of our culture. One factor to development since the floor is attached to the action."

The animation seen in Tangle of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development will set three main objectives.

On the first ideological:

Animation is the realization of our political beliefs, our active adherence to the fundamental principles of our movement, '' Peace - Unity - Development ". These principles teach us the National Revolutionary Movement for Development Manifesto, should be the guideline for our actions.

The entertainment is an essential foundation of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development methodology, is therefore:

Awareness of the Rwandan People to the ideology National Revolutionary Movement for Development policy. The mobilization of the population for a common ideal which is none other than improving their living conditions. It seeks to play the role of political communication between the different actors of the political life of our society and to inculcate the masses revolutionary ideas adapted to the national reality.

Then a cultural objective:

The animation is not mere folklore. It is rather an opportunity to express and externalize the pride of the Rwandan people to belong to the same national culture. At the same time it promotes social relations between the different components of the Rwandan Society, whatever their origin, ethnicity and religion, social status, it also enhances the cultural heritage of Rwanda, and also cultivated patriotism.

Animation is finally an objective of leisure.

The manifesto said about "intellectual and physical relaxation cultivates the spirit of brotherhood, mutual esteem between men safeguarding morals and serving as a means of mobilization."

But the animation is also a way for people to express their support to the Head of the Nation by the general assent transpires songs of the people, his dancing, his joy.

For the animation keeps his real substance, the National Revolutionary Movement of the Central Committee for Development continues to insist that the themes of the animation must reflect the development according to the characteristics and the vocation of every cell. In this way, each cell will avoid sterile words.

In this context, the Movement supports and will continue to support the various cells that have understood our desire to mobilize human resources for development, using among other animation.

The inspirational themes will be contained in the Manifesto and Statutes of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development and in various speeches of national leaders. It is a way of instilling members Cells intrinsic value of the ideology and the National Revolutionary Movement for Development of the doctrine. Should we emphasize with force, the Manifesto remains the only framework for political action.

The movie thus defined is therefore one of the ways:

stimulate and motivate the masses for development; create confidence in Rwanda itself; cultivating the patriotic sense of valuing the Rwandan cultural heritage; to offer every Rwandan time to flourish.

Militants,

The Movement wants all citizens enjoy the best conditions to be more useful to society by maximizing his physical, intellectual and moral. Enhancing these capabilities is an essential factor in the development of our country. National development is the responsibility of every Rwandan who must be educated and aware so that it is master of its destiny.

The Government, through its Ministry of Social Welfare and Community Development, does everything to make the living conditions of rural areas improve. Improved housing and sanitation; the creation of development poles providing the necessary services that can help reunite habitat, encouraging the spirit of initiative, innovation and association, are all ways to cause a desirable change and indispensable in rural areas. These innovative ideas will be taken from the communal development and continuing education centers (CCDF), which aim to:

Strengthen the capacity of the population to support its own development collectively; Improving living and working population; Promote increased food production; Accelerate social progress and cultural development; Facilitate access to goods and services essential to the development of the person and of society as a whole.

The goal is that every town has at least one Municipal Center for Development and Continuing Education.

The Ministry of Social Affairs and Community Development will also ensure the promotion of the welfare of the family in the spirit of the manifesto of our Movement which enjoins us to protect "the family, the nation mother cell." The Department will apply search conditions likely to bring more harmony and well-being in the family in accordance with the principle of equality of men and women.

Therefore, I reiterate my call to all men and all women of the country as well as rural urban that take the responsibility of families to work very closely to safeguard the integrity of the family and especially for the education of children, future of our country. This of course only be possible if men and women equally share the work in the mission they are assigned.

I would also invite parents to strengthen their authority in the education of children to stem the scourge of juvenile delinquency, diversion leading source vagrancy, theft, robbery and prostitution.

The Rwandan family code in development will allow us to trace the specific context of family policy taking into account our culture and changes facing our society constantly.

The Ministry of Social Affairs and Community Development must finally ensure that the animated-extension of service to be more imaginative and creative so that all the forces of the nation to work together in order to achieve self-development all men in all their social dimensions and individual.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

The high density of our population and the high rate of average growth are the basis of the scarcity of arable land. This lack of land and the lack of non-farm employment are that the population can not meet basic needs, and accelerate the process of rural exodus of young people and adults. We must therefore seek to achieve a balance between production and population growth.

The National Population Office (ONAPO), one of its objectives is to study the factors that promote this balance must propose concrete measures to keep harmony between population growth and socio-economic development economic.

And Public Health must be primarily protecting the health of the masses. The efforts we ask the population can only be achieved if conditions continue to weaken us. This is why the Government has endeavored to increase across the country, health infrastructure, aided by the UMUGANDA population and benefactors. He is determined to continue this effort and to seek more drugs and equipment and to equip these centers trained and disciplined personnel.

Militants,

Rwanda is faced with a serious situation because of the very rapid increase in population in a geographical context completely saturated. There is a significant gap between agricultural production and population growth. This makes it necessary to use intense as possible of the available agricultural potential.

Everyone knows that Rwanda is largely rural. The vast majority of the population derives its income from working the land and the development of other sectors of the economy is still untapped. Also the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock must strive to improve in every way, the productivity of farmers and ranchers and promote the rural areas of better living conditions.

Our Third National Development Plan Economic and Social has the first 'mission' meeting the food needs of the population. " This mission we also find much in the foreground in the second. This shows the importance the Government attaches to food problems. If we are to achieve a balanced development, we must, at all costs, achieve food self-sufficiency first. All measures must be taken to ensure that our food production increases in both quantity and quality. Food production is the foundation of the economy. If it is not sufficient if the quantities harvested are too uncertain if prices are uncertain, the producer farmer does not want to accept the modern market economy and the rural economy will remain based on self-consumption. This will make it difficult to use intensive production techniques, expansion of export crops, regional specialization. In short the food economy is not developing, she affects, obviously, exist.

Land use must be rational. As recommended by the Third National Congress of the Movement, efforts should be concentrated in the work of erosion control, the use of organic and mineral fertilizers, the association of agriculture and livestock in order increase the productivity of our soils and therefore food production.

We know that getting organic manure becomes difficult because of steady and gradual decline of breeding cattle to population pressure. But to overcome this handicap, the Government launched a comprehensive small livestock distribution program. distribution centers have been built in Kabuye, Ruhengeri, Butare and Cyangugu. Secondary centers will be built to increase the distribution capacity. A factory for the manufacture of animal feed will be built in the near future. Thus livestock semi-housed or permanent housing will find an indispensable complement to its productivity. This program is not only the production of organic matter, but especially the production of animal protein whose population greatly needs. Everyone knows that in this matter the Rwandan ration is far below the tolerable minimum. Also in order to increase and balance the ration, the hatchery program will continue and opportunities to enhance the productivity of our lakes will be exploited.

So food production is our priority. But in many parts of the country the timber for preparing food is scarce. That is why the Government introduced the National Tree Day and several reforestation projects are implemented in most prefectures. This effort will continue with greater intensity and effectiveness until all forest areas are planted.

Agriculture can not be successful and profitable without the selected seeds with high productivity without improving farming techniques and without the modernization of production facilities. Also thinking us restructure our Agricultural Research Institute (ISAR) for research really at the service of the farmer-rancher and farmer so that it can participate in some way in this research. We want this so research stations and laboratories, and it overflows into the fields with the peasants, to actually improve their practices. We want this research is no longer subject only to the so-called innovative ideas but it completely ignores the consequences. The research and extension must be intimately linked to greater efficiency and profitability.

Agriculture is education, is infrastructure. This vision of the development of the rural sector is its existence in integrated rural development projects and moving towards a strategy to create local ways of intensifying agricultural production. Several such projects have emerged or have some funding. As an example we can quote the proposed development of Mutara, Bugesera project-Gisaka-Migongo, project Buberuka, the project to improve upland soils, the project to improve food crops and of coffee cultivation on Lake Kivu in the Butare Prefecture development project. of Ruhengeri and Gitarama Prefectures development projects are under development and the start of work will take place as soon as the ongoing process of obtaining credits have been completed.

In order to fight against famine and fill seasonal shortages due to the vagaries of climate, the Government will continue its policy of regional trade and its efforts to provide the country food security strategic stocks.

The development of food crops must be our main concern, but industrial crops must also be maintained at a satisfactory level, enabling farmers to have a good income and the country, needed foreign exchange to the economy. The balance will always be sought and every piece of land is to be operated according to his vocation. For this purpose a soil map and soil vocation is being developed.

Agriculture can not develop properly as long as the farmer will not have easy access to means of production such as fertilizers, seeds, pesticides and all kinds of essential equipment.

farmer support mechanisms must be put in place to enable it to produce more and better store its products.

To encourage the farmers to produce more, we need a remunerative price of their products. Thus the Ministry of Economy and Trade will ensure the organization of internal trade and find ways and means to promote exchanges between regions. The Commission on Price will be rebuilding better restructured to make it more effective. The attention was paid to the "Beer Primus" and on oil products should be extended to all other consumer products.

The consumer must be protected and guided in choosing the products they buy. This department should ensure the training of traders so that they can actually accomplish their mission. We can be proud of the results that came the men of Rwandan business. But we should not they remain in the speculative trade, they have to actually invest in various sectors of national development. The Chamber of Commerce and Industry, recently renovated, will help in this work of creativity to our economy is actually a market economy.

The III National Revolutionary Movement for Development National Congress defined the main directions that are the foundation of our Five-Year Development Plan. Among these directions, those related to the industry and our attention:

A self-sufficient food in quantity and quality; A job generating income that can meet the basic needs of the population.

When talking about the satisfaction of basic needs, it is understood that the population must be able to feed, house and clothe themselves properly. It must have access to education and benefit from health care and recreation. Meeting these needs requires everyone to have an economy that is able to get him enough income. However, given the limited natural resources and insufficient capital formation, job vacancies can not suffice for the wave of generations that ask for jobs. Our policy must be to create new jobs.

The first sector that creates jobs and most important is agriculture.

To this end, intensification of agriculture will not only allow better use of the available labor force, reducing the number of 'unemployed' and the increase in average household income, but also increase the agricultural labor force. Unfortunately, the average area of ​​family farms decreased continuously due to the population explosion of our population. This means that the agricultural sector can not, alone, absorb all the available workforce. The industrialization of the country and the promotion of handicrafts therefore are essential to make our independent and prosperous economy, and to create new jobs.

I therefore call again, not only in Rwanda but also to our foreign friends to invest, many in the industrialization of our country industry. Our policy regarding the right to property, justice, peace, free enterprise, the flexibility of our investment code, our customs legislation, the various bilateral agreements, such as investment protection agreements are all measures taken to encourage such investment. The Government will spare no effort to take further action, or to improve those already taken, so that there is always a happy harmony between the interests of investors and those of the country.

The Department of Economy and Trade specifically seek to improve its services responsible for the identification of projects to be submitted to investors, documentation and assistance to businesses. On the other hand, the administrative procedure must, while targeting a minimum guarantee, to avoid the usual slowness which sometimes discouraged best wishes.

The realization of the country's industrial development objectives requires resources that will be designed based on the following considerations:

By targeting the needs of the population and especially food, action to undertake industrial development is intended to be decentralized or even ruralized because Rwanda is still a rural country economy. * It will be necessary to prepare the rural level the home infrastructure, including by way of constructing industrial zones designed for small and medium businesses, as well as handicrafts. The industrialization in a country like Rwanda, where the already too narrow market is further weakened by the low purchasing power, can be done through incentives.

The role of government is crucial. The Government must strongly support the industrial and commercial enterprises, especially those engaged in the production of capital goods and other products that Rwanda is now forced to import. Also in the area of ​​employment, high labor intensive projects should always be encouraged.

Knowledge of the labor market and income issues will be deepened through better administrative registration and launching of statistical surveys. Thus the Ministry of Public Service and Employment will better organize the labor sector. It will also ensure better performance of public employees. If the best officers should be encouraged and stimulated so that they can excel, it is also quite justified to ward off evil and lazy. The quality of services should always be sought.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

I must acknowledge and praise the efforts of our people to get out of underdevelopment in which we live. These efforts enabled the implementation of several activities essential to the economic growth of our country.

Through UMUGANDA, roads were traced, schools and buildings were built, health centers operate, the work of reforestation and erosion control have been performed. All these actions are intended to achieve the objectives of the MRND economic policy are promoting Rwandan man and his free development, the establishment of a free society and free from human exploitation the man.

Despite our determination to ensure a better life for our people several factors still hampering our economy: our lack of resources, lack of appropriate technology, lack of industrial infrastructure. The problems inherent in developing countries, there are other related to our country's isolation.

Rwanda, a landlocked country landlocked sees with regret the cost of exports and imports go up constantly. The extremely long distances that our goods have to travel and therefore also long delivery times and increases in daily transportation costs, make our exports do not bring us enough currency that we are entitled to receive and imported products are inaccessible to those with very low incomes. Negotiations must be multiplied and sustained, with our neighbors, especially those in the east, for transportation facilities and transit we are granted.

The opening by air should be continued too. Now that the capabilities of the Kanombe International Airport just been increased, we must ensure that maximize the return on these facilities and to promote the development and effectiveness of our AirRwanda airline.

In order to provide the country with a good quality telecommunications service, the Ministry of Posts and Communications has undertaken an extensive development program and modernization of its national network. This equipment program presented for the 1980-1986 period aims primarily to break the geographic isolation, economic and social of our country and to open up rural areas.

According to the Third National Congress recommendations of our movement, transit must be better organized across the entire country, so that each traveler can have a minimum of security and a minimum of comfort. The Government will therefore seek to further support the action ONATRACOM. But convinced that Office alone can solve all transportation problems in common, the Government will also take measures likely to encourage the private sector to buy large vehicles transporting people. The efforts that are born in this sector must be maintained and encouraged. Measures will also be taken to the domestic freight to be better regulated so that the cost is not overly strike price of goods as they must be transported in good conditions.

For these measures to be facilitated, the roads must be in good condition. To this end, the Ministry of Public Works will continue to improve the roads that have some interest in the development of our country. Our goal is to tar all major roads. Thus, continuing the effort to open up, asphalting of Kigali-Butare and Kigali-Ruhengeri road-Cyanika have to start, and that those of Butare-Cyangugu road will begin soon. The steps are underway to find funding for the Cyangugu-Kibuye road whose studies are already available. The work of updating the Gitarama-Kibuye section of studies are underway and studies of Kayonza-Kagitumba roads and Gitarama-Ruhengeri. I must tell you that my Government will not wait for the end of these studies to seek funding for fieldwork. The steps are already underway; some funding sources have already expressed their interest to participate in these important projects for socio-economic development of our country.

Alongside this effort paving and improvement of roads, municipalities, through Umuganda, continue to maintain local roads and open up isolated areas, who do not participate fully in the economic life of the country, and, secondly, not collect good fruits. The Ministry of Public Works will continue to assist them so that they can solve the technical problems that may arise during the execution of the work. An effort should also be made for the maintenance of public buildings and the construction of other housing both in Kigali and in other prefectures of the country.

The housing situation is worrying. In rural areas, despite the efforts made over recent years, residential houses remain very modest because of the income greatly reduced farmers who do not allow them to generate sufficient surplus to improve their housing conditions and following too dispersal habitat, making it inaccessible rural community facilities and roads. To remedy this, the production and use of local raw materials should be intensified. Regarding household access to equipment, the choice of investment required for the provision of water and electricity should be rather guided by social considerations as the only search the immediate financial return.

Population pressure in the countryside and the rural exodus resulting also make the problem of urban housing increasingly difficult. The lack of off neighborhoods and the spirit of speculation continue to drive the squatter settlement. Insufficient funds allocated to low-income populations and the prohibitive cost of obtaining building materials have resulted in the slum building in the outskirts of urban centers, the situation is particularly serious in Kigali.

Moreover, we note that the creation of the Mortgage Fund of Rwanda whose objective was precisely the promotion of social housing, hardly able to fully accomplish its mission due to the lack of resources which it could have.

To remedy this situation, special attention will be paid to the restructuring and equipping of existing neighborhoods and the construction of new residential areas by installing reception facilities. The Fund Mortgage of Rwanda will be able to effectively contribute to the construction of social housing and for that she will benefit from the state guarantee for its real estate and will be endowed with increased financial means.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

Rwanda, like other developing countries is seriously concerned about the problems of energy, given its impact on the economy.

The size of the energy crisis that our country is probably not related only to oil shocks.

The so-called traditional energies, beyond general market transactions to satisfy our energy needs only. Primary energy consumption in Rwanda comes from wood, wood waste and other plant waste.

In some urban areas, charcoal is the main fuel for cooking. Unfortunately firewood and charcoal which serve as the main fuel are in sharp decline following the loss of forests and despite reforestation efforts. Furthermore, the development of hydropower sites in the country will achieve a barely sufficient energy capacity to fuel our still infant industry. Of '' recent findings based on the analysis of the present situation, show that energy stalemate is likely in the short term. This possibility is confirmed when analyzing the impacts of the development of the country by increasing the population on the one hand, and the desire to intensify the sectors of industry, the other services and transport "

Energy independence of Rwanda is also one of our priorities. To this end, a development of our energy potential is needed to improve the standard of living of the population and to encourage the establishment of industries. The peat deposits must be intensively exploited for direct industrial use, a transformation into electrical energy or transformation into coke for use as a domestic energy. Programs to use methane gas from Lake Kivu will be accelerated.

Emphasis should also be put on the inventory, research and rational management of our water resources to meet the needs of different users. Also in the energy sector, a political economy will be conducted so as not to waste the limited resources that we have, but that will be increased through research techniques using new and renewable energies such as solar energy. It appears imperative to continue reforestation programs for dealing with problems resulting from the lack of wood and deforestation phenomena.

The prosperity of our economy demands a rational exploitation of our resources. This is why research is underway to better understand our basement to increase our mining production.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

The year 1981 was proclaimed "Year of Rural Water". My speech Five in July 1981, I had the opportunity to remind the people of Rwanda in this area as in all others, we must not rely on miracles, but on the continuous efforts of the authorities and the population, efforts we seek to support a comprehensive and effective international cooperation. "

The week of the 1981 projects have seen some of the results of these efforts, including through the opening or starting rural supply systems. It is not my intention to list all the actions undertaken during this year, I will indicate simply that the Government has spared no effort to help municipalities find drinking water for the population. So many studies for small conveyances were conducted across the country, water supply and rehabilitation actions were financed, a communal standpipe refresher course was organized, not to mention awareness meetings that took place all over the country.

This national effort was fortunately supplemented and supported by agencies and friendly countries, without forgetting the work of many volunteers benefactors who continue to support us in our efforts to the welfare of the Rwandan population.

The shares recorded during this year are multipies and can be classified into three categories:

Conveyances and studies of conveyances made on financing of the Rwandan Government (Ministry of Natural Resources - Ordinary Budget, Ministry of Planning - Development Budget). awareness and training activities organized by the Natural Resources Ministry and the Interior Ministry. Studies and conveyances made on external financing (EDF Belgium, World Bank, O.V.N., UNICEF, and other benefactors).

The total expenditure or about to be amounted to over two billion Rwandan francs which one billion for the single "global Icyanya".

But still there are many problems and the path is still long. I had the opportunity to highlight the lack of technically trained personnel within the departments responsible for rural water sector, the lack of sufficient financial resources, the lack of appropriate legislation, plan Director of water, a management agency ... the national year of the rural hydraulic will have been, in addition to actions carried out or in progress, an opportunity for us to realize our situation; it has been the beginning of a long and complex process. The Ministry of Natural Resources and the National Committee for Water and Sanitation were commissioned to address these problems; they work there and we await the results of their efforts.

Although the year of rural water ended with 1981 water will continue to be "Source of Life"; the use of clean water will remain our daily concern and the Government will continue to encourage and support rural water shares.

In all cases, the past year has the merit of having raised awareness of the Rwandan people the importance of using clean water for his health, the urgency for the development of a rural hydraulic works management policy. Many supply systems were completed, others are ongoing or will be soon; I do not tire of repeating the success of these actions requires the contribution of each and every one of us, especially those who are responsible for training the population and raise awareness of respect more than in the past, heritage of the well-appointed and works intended to ensure a safe and adequate water.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

One of the Third Five-Year Development Plan missions is to promote better use of human resources through a '' Education-Training "that allows everyone to fully play its role in economic and social life of the country. Lack of staff qualified sufficient in number in government and the private sector is one of the constraints of our economy. That is why the Rwandan Government, true to the manifesto of our Movement must ensure the promotion of a technically capable elite, morally balanced and mindful of the interests of the nation. Therefore since the advent of the Republic Although we are determined to review the structures and the purpose of education and the education of youth in order to enable the -ci to integrate into the production system or continue training in accordance with the vocation of each and the needs of society.

The tidal wave of education reform is the integration of education and training efforts to the production targets. To this end, the embodiment of the primary and post-primary, the integrated craft education, professional and planning of the secondary and tertiary, so that the lower level managers, middle and top, formed by school, can effectively meet the needs of the national economy, is the cornerstone of the expected educational system of school reform.

Note that the Rwandan planners reported that long to "improve the efficiency of primary education, it will get: adapt programs of primary education because the programs need to be reformed in the light.:

very strong losses recognized that deprive a large share of any investment character education spending and turn them into unnecessary consumption. anti-social and economic effects in the long term any unsuitable primary education to national realities. Hazard on this subject imported solutions. Under these conditions, the primary education programs should: either cut the middle child of origin, but to help change this same medium rehabilitate manual labor and the dignity of the peasant condition. include notions of agriculture; observation of the environment, respect for nature and mainly of the tree; basic theoretical and practical courses in agriculture. Thus the child, future farmer, can leave the customary agricultural practices in which his parents have lived "

And today: "In Africa as elsewhere, experts agree that school systems need to be expanded and improved, particularly at primary level."

Upon my keynote speech of August 1, 1973, defining among other objectives to be assigned to education and training of the Rwandan youth, several actions were taken to prepare and define the main lines of this reform 'education. Thus March 25, 1977, the general measures of implementation and elements of the reform were adopted by the Council of Government and distributed for execution.

Until today, evaluations tell us that we have many commendable achievements to the joint efforts of the people and the Government of Rwanda, religious denominations, friendly countries and international organizations.

Alongside these achievements, several serious deficiencies in the implementation of the education reform were unfortunately also noted. Thanks to the recommendations of the Third National Congress of the Movement, mistakes have been corrected and the necessary adjustments will operate whenever the need arises given the available resources of the country in material and human resources.

In the educational enterprise, the interference between the student and the supervisory body is unmistakable.

Reform of the proposed Education proposes to streamline our school programs and slow the progressive decline in the quality of education due to the insufficient number of qualified teachers, the quality of the inspection body and the high ratio of students master.

To improve the level of qualification of teachers, the Government is to set up an internship organization system and appropriate pedagogical supervision of teachers. In this context, more than 2,500 primary school teachers have been recycled and mobile teams mentoring and outreach are being established.

However, the program still contains imperfections due to its short duration, qualification of trainers and poor equipment. This improvement being a palliative to meet immediate needs, the Government proceeded to establish normal schools whose first winners are already in operation.

Improving the quality of education also depends on the quality of the work of the inspectorate.

Even the administrative structures and the education inspection are laminated, teachers seem left to themselves. The Inspectors, instead of looking after the inspection, become the administrative office, so that their work must be on the ground. In response, the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education will:

Review the criteria for selecting Inspectors and Maîtresprincipaux area; Redefining objectively and operationally responsibilities of each category of inspectors; Facilitate ways in the work of the inspectors.

To these difficulties is added the overcrowding of classes that do not allow martens track each child according to his abilities to assimilate the lessons in the program. This in fact, difficult to master immediately, reduces the quality of education.

The universal education goal will also involve not only human resources but also material that the country can not find a time and immediately given its resources. The effort in the field of development of school buildings has achieved the average enrollment rate of about 58%. The buildings currently available are insufficient to increase this rate and ensure the reception of all children of school age. Professors and teaching materials are also seriously lacking. This is why, in this area, efforts are still to be provided and the Government is considering supporting the work of local authorities in the construction of primary classes, to support the financing of construction and equipment of next CERAI programming into account the means of the country and to seek funds to undertake the conversion work, expansion and construction of secondary schools.

These deficiencies are associated with that equipment. For overcome, several actions are planned:

the creation of a national manufacturing center of learning materials and school furniture. The establishment of a manufacturing guide instructional materials; The creation of a teaching materials fee; The creation of school stores and strengthening the Printing School.

The restructuring of teaching was initially universalisation of Primary, admission 10% of this quota to secondary and guidance of 90% to other Rural Education and Integrated Artisanal.

This ambition is being proved incompatible with the grounds on which the country can count, the Government considered it appropriate to make adjustments.

Thus, in primary education, the promotion is governed by a regulation which, while discouraging losses, however, allow the advancement based on individual potential of students.

As for the accession mechanisms Secondary Education, they are subject to several criteria, namely the national competition, education of the student and the regional and ethnic balance, both in the orientation towards the various branches in their location. Admission to secondary raises criticism. However, we believe that regardless of the selection criteria, the serious problem is the lack of secondary school places. Some 46,000 children completing primary, only 3,500 are admitted to secondary level (1) with available seats. However, we hope that the resolutions of the 3rd Congress of the MRND are applied.

Regarding the spread of the IIBA to welcome the 90% quota, the cost of investment and operating fail to immediately achieve this. Neither the number of teachers required, and fees of their compensation or buildings, technical equipment and furniture, may not be immediately available. The Government has therefore decided to spread the program over a period consistent with its human and financial resources.

This panorama of activities to achieve the objectives and constraints lead to the following considerations:

one hand, the universal education program is ambitious; it is reasonable to design and long-term achievable goal and undertaking of acquired building actions particularly at the primary level. On the other hand the lack of premises, staff and equipment required to stagger the implementation of CERAI. But post-primary education system should aim to be the only officially widespread throughout the territory. Further professionalization of Secondary Education requires sufficient and qualified staff especially in technical courses that it is impossible to obtain in the current situation of teacher training. This situation requires immediate action in particular regarding the strict scheduling requirements, the creation and extension of teacher training institutes, planning scholarships and the systematic blocking of the recruitment of staff trained to teach to other state services as private.

The educational reform will continue to reach higher education which already started its restructuring. At the National University of Rwanda, two campuses are operational from the academic year 1981-1982.

The mission assigned to the University's intellectual and human promotion of the Rwandan people in whose service she devoted herself mainly. For this mission is accomplished, the National University of Rwanda should train managers for priority sectors of development; participate in the social, economic and cultural life through education and research, and finally intensify and expand the areas of vocational training. The Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research will make every effort to create the right conditions to promote and encourage the development of knowledge and scientific research in all fields. Coordination in the field of scientific and technological research should be exercised so that the latter is the foundation of our socio-economic development. To this end, and as recommended by the Third National Congress of M.R.N.D., a National Council of Scientific Research and Technology should be set up.

Development must not lead to the loss of cultural identity of our country. The Manifesto M.R.N.D. reminds us that "the development of the Rwandan culture will be directed towards the formation of the committed man, proud of his country, released from the legacy of feudal customs, any complex and prejudice.

The Rwandan people must define its culture and absorb it deeply so that it can bring to other cultures that it has authentic and remove wisely what can hone his. "

Rwandan culture and should not be limited to the folk heritage of the past, it must be the basis and catalyst for national development. Thus Rwandan culture, purified of all that is opposed to the strengthening of national cohesion and progress of Rwandan society, will be popularized.

Youth must be protected against all evil currents that can affect his personality and cause its disintegration. For this youth must imbibe the values ​​and qualities that give our people their pride and sense of authenticity. Youth and army will actively participate in the development of our country and, according to the Manifesto of our Movement, which tells us that "rural development will be oriented to involve youth, which must, too, feel fully responsible in search of progress. " To achieve this goal-school youth should be mobilized and better regulated.

And as I said in my keynote speech of 01.08.1973, the Ministry of Youth and Sports should "focus more particularly its civic education and preparation for working life, for life most of which leads in rural areas. This is why an agricultural base and craft training and the cooperative movement must be given to them. " This will maintain youth who finish in the rural and craft schools built in rural areas. The et.loisirs sports must be well organized to give people a well-deserved relaxation after work hours.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development;

The development of our country requires our combined efforts. Our Movement forbids waste and we required to austerity. The Third National Congress of Our Movement has once again reminded that austerity is a requirement for achieving the objectives of M.R.N.D. and we need to avoid unnecessary expenses, pure prestige or mere ostentation. The Ministry of Finance will ensure that the state budget is not used for non profitable purposes. Although we are victims of deteriorating terms of trade, global inflation paralyzes the economy, the Ministry will take measures to increase state revenues by appropriate tax law and by diversifying and an increase in the added value of exports.

The situation parastatal companies and joint ventures should be well considered that they can be really profitable and thus participate in the national development effort. Indeed these Public institutions, and, to a lesser extent, the Mixed Companies, aware, to varying degrees, serious problems that hamper their operation. These include:

the complexity and poor understanding of the objectives assigned to them, lack of processing and information flow, dilution of authority and decision-making, low motivation of agents, incomplete or imperfect implementation of legal texts; financial imbalances.

Lack of financial and human resources and because of the flawed interpretation of objectives, many state companies rather pursue secondary goals and are often confused.

To overcome this situation, it is urgent that the administration and management bodies have a code of conduct and develop for each period of 2 to 3 years of a business plan to clarify the objectives and define the material resources human and implement.

Drafting the budget and mandatory annual reports must respond to the concern of the plot company plan.

In general, the Public Enterprises are experiencing obvious gaps in the establishment and operation of the accounting data to monitor, assess and regularly coordinate their activities in the adapting their objectives. Therefore, the financial statements for the year end are nonexistent or established: so extra-accounting, which causes a lack of rigor in the forecasts of all kinds (budget, investment plans ...), essential the achievement of objectives. It is therefore essential to create oversight bodies and assistance to Public Institutions.

In this context the Government intends to create:

An administrative agency high-level meeting in the services of administrative, economic, financial, accounting, commercial and technical, to monitor and analyze the extent to which the company plans and attend Public Institutions leaders highlighting in their eyes the positive role of the means of control, facilitating their relations with the Administration in general and in providing them, if necessary, direct assistance in some cases. This organization could be called "National Management Control ''. An organization called" Central Accountant "distinct from the previous body, but attached to it. This kind of common accounting poo companies of State would be composed of Rwandan and foreign accounting highly qualified and will cover the cost accounting of these companies that often at their disposal, the employees most capable of collecting raw data to process accounting and use them regularly.

With regard to the authority and decision making, the current Law on Public Establishments is to improve particular to clarify the powers exercised by each level. At this stage, it is useful to recall that * must be distinguished:

the state power exercised mainly by the Ministries in the management supervisory power, vested in the Board of Directors on management power exercised by the management and collection of power and analysis of information to entrust the National control being established Management.

These powers must be strictly separated under threat of disruption of business as knowing "what to do" is useless if we do not know "who does what".

Crown corporations may not properly perform their duties if they have a qualified and sufficiently motivated. This is why a training and development program accounting staff and control should be considered as soon as possible. Approached about it, some friends agencies are willing to help us substantially to achieve the program. Once trained and perfected, Public Institutions agents need to have a good performance, have sufficient material means but considering the economic conditions of the country.

Despite some shortcomings here and there, the laws and regulations governing the Public Facilities are quite good, but unfortunately they are seldom notices applied. It is important that each level of decision knows perfectly legal texts to avoid adventures.

The Public institutions are also often faced with financial imbalances or because of economic conditions or lack of rigor in the management or by nature - even those institutions. This pattern leads us to ask the question whether the existence of our state companies is justified.

It is therefore urgent to undertake a serious study to determine which institutions will be transformed into mixed or simple administrative services companies.

The Third National Congress of Our Movement has recommended that the credit policy is done democratically, and that credit reaches all backgrounds and all regions of the country. There are no visible signs that this recommendation, which was made several times by different political bodies, has been respected. This requires that all administrative bodies so that policies are sensitized to seek a real solution to this problem that continues to preoccupy many Rwandans. Efforts should also be continued and intensified fight against embezzlement of public property and to recover misappropriated assets.

It is always regrettable that the effort by the services is still insufficient.

Various pretexts are always advanced: lack of means of locomotion, organized insolvency debtors ... but all these excuses can be accepted any longer to cover the weakness and carelessness of those involved in this sector. The departments concerned, especially the Ministry of Finance, should also organize more regular monitoring and inspection missions to depositories of public funds, so public accountants cease to behave owners of the funds they hold.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

With the advent of the Second Republic, we have restored peace and national unity that were compromised by a group of antisocial people. With the return of peace and the creation of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, we mobilized the people to be master of its destiny. The individual and collective discipline should strengthen national unity in the design of the action, effective weapon in the fight for progress.

We have achieved satisfactory results in all sectors of development of our country. The Ministry of Justice must be vigilant so that the population is still beneficial and proud of the achievements of our moral revolution of July 5, 1973. We have provided the judiciary with the tools to better fulfill its mission.

Thus laws on the restructuring of the judiciary have been arrested and other measures will be taken to our justice be healthy and it really is in the service of the masses.

This means that arbitrariness is to condemn and that judgments must be made within the legal timeframe. Perhaps it is not superfluous to recall that the Ministry of Justice must continue to fight laziness, corruption and irresponsibility that can cripple our judicial system and cause serious harm to the interests of innocent people. This department will ensure that the freedoms guaranteed by our constitution are actually met. But I appeal again to our compatriots who are struggling to make believe that enjoyment of his freedom is to ignore the others.

"But freedom is not only a right that one claims for oneself is a duty that one undertakes with regard to others. To really serve peace, the freedom of every human being and every human community must respect the freedoms and rights of other individuals or groups. it is in this respect its limitations, but its logic and dignity, because man is by nature a social being "

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

To consolidate the policy of peace, unity and development of the Second Republic has sought to actively carry out inside the country throughout the past eight years, the Government of Rwanda has used diplomacy more dynamic and all-round who managed to break the chains of isolation of Rwanda, making our country the place it deserves on the international stage.

The Government of the Second Republic has given impetus, more efficient, relations between Rwanda and its many partners around the world, in order to put our foreign policy and cooperation for national development.

Since the advent of the Second Republic in the Speech Program of 1 August 1973 in the January 8, 1979 and in many other speeches inside and outside of Rwanda, I have repeatedly stressed the objective of promoting a foreign policy based on peace, mutual respect, positive non-alignment on the understanding and the essential solidarity between peoples.

With this in mind, I put special emphasis on strengthening the relations of friendship, fraternity and cooperation with neighboring countries by advocating a policy of good neighborliness inclusive.

The results achieved are a testament as to the extent of efforts in achieving the principles of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development Manifesto which notably requires that Rwanda is represented wherever its action is essential to serve the real interests of the country ".

The Second Republic has consolidated the sympathy of credit enjoyed by our country since 1973, he grew his circle of friends while making its voice heard in the concert of nations, with more echo than in the past.

The results are realized by strengthening our cooperation with the countries and organizations that friends are becoming more and supporting more actively our development efforts.

We are primarily focused on developing and deepening good-neighborly relations with the countries that surround us. Immediately after the Second Republic, these countries have responded favorably to our desire to maintain relations of mutual trust, of friendship, solidarity and active cooperation. This harmonious evolution resulted notably through regular and frequent contacts at all levels and by establishing appropriate frameworks for the exercise and strengthening of our cooperation.

If we have given priority to the revitalization of our good neighborly relations and regional and sub-regional, the Second Republic was parallel commitment to consolidate the friendship and sympathy inspired our country beyond our immediate vicinity.

And beyond the bilateral relations that have gained momentum over the past eight years, Rwanda has shown internationally with more determination, providing a significant and valuable contribution in international meetings dealing with problems that facing the international community. Our diplomacy, continuing the momentum to the nation in July 1973, focused on consolidating and externally peace policy, renewal and solidarity to which we refer constantly to ensure fulfillment of the Rwandan population mobilized whole for its own development.

Over the years, the activities allocated to our Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation have thus developed to meet our commitment to openness embracing all key sectors of national life.

Accordance with the principles of mutual respect, non-alignment, peaceful coexistence and cooperation, true to the spirit of the Manifesto of the MRND, the Government of the Second Republic has confirmed its willingness to cooperate with all peace-loving peoples and n has not failed to build on the positive experience of other nations to get out of the rut of underdevelopment. It will maintain and strengthen this policy as recommended by the 3rd National Revolutionary Movement for Development Congress.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

While consolidating a healthy and active foreign policy of good neighborliness, dynamic cooperation at bilateral, regional and international Rwandan diplomacy has scored points by winning new friends in the world.

Relations between Rwanda and friendly countries in the world industrialized and with international organizations have been a very special attention given the role they play in contributing to the achievement of our development goals.

Rwanda has definitely repudiated the political inaction and empty chair, as evidenced by various emissaries who traveled the world, participating in international conferences and by the voice of our countries to governments and organizations of friends.

In this respect, the visits I have made myself, both bilaterally and in the multilateral framework, deserve special mention.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

We are compelled to note that despite the appeals for peace launched from all sides and to which we join, human rights are still being violated here and there, self-determination of peoples is far from universal, the degrading political apartheid, racism, the use of force to settle international disputes continue to insult the conscience of humanity. It must also be noted that the remains of the different forces of domination are still deeply rooted in the Third World, that the imbalance in international economic relations seems to defy time and the world is wasting its resources in the manufacture of weapons of mass destruction .

Faithful to the principles of its foreign policy enshrined in the Manifesto M.R.N.D., the Second Republic has developed and maintain an active diplomacy in the service of peace, a prerequisite for the harmonious development and rapprochement between peoples and international cooperation.

Such was and such remains the moral basis of our foreign policy that is expressed in the desire to maintain not only the friendly relations but also the relations of cooperation with all the loving people like us peace and justice .

The achievements recorded as assets of the Second Republic in the framework of this policy are many. They are an encouragement to move forward. That is why we are committed to maintaining and developing our presence on the international stage, with a foreign policy that will remain for development, peace and justice, constituting the indispensable complement to efforts within the country to ensure a harmonious and integrated national development.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

There can be no progress in the country without a plan for preparing and implementing development projects. Thus the Ministry of Planning will continue to prepare these plans and especially to play the important coordinating role for the Movement keeps us from walking piecemeal.

The outline I have drawn you and to guide government action in the coming years, will enable the Rwandan people mobilized in the National Revolutionary Movement for Development to achieve its wellness. This action must therefore promote growth to improve the living conditions of our people. Ensuring the survival of the population by food balance always remain our priority. Once the food reaches equilibrium, we will turn to development activities itself, that is to say, projects to improve the living standards exceeding the survival measures.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

If I have long exposed the achievements of our action taken since July 5, 1973, I do not hide Even though the Republic also experienced difficult times.

There are only a few months just unwind in the strict legality, the matter probably the most painful caused by the ambition of some people thirsty for power and little regard to the interests of the Nation.

Advocating hatred and division, these troublemakers were undertaken in March-April 1980 to launch subversive leaflets throughout the country to destabilize the regime and take power.

Despite repeated calls to order, they persisted in their evil desire to undermine the institutions legally established and have resorted to this, banditry, murder, poisoning and various other means.

Faced with this serious situation and considering the fundamental principles of M.R.N.D. which enjoin us to preserve at all costs the National Unity, it was decided to bring these criminals to court to answer for their misdeeds.

We did not want for this to create from scratch a special court designed to publicize their cause since the normal court system was perfectly suited to the situation. He obviously took a long time to judicial services concerned to conduct investigations and make decisions knowingly.

As the verdict dated 25 November 1931 by the Court of State Security, was the culmination of a lengthy procedure to establish clearly the responsibility of each defendant. Convictions and acquittals reveal, in honor of the Rwandan justice, fairness and impartiality that I personally recommended in the review of this unfortunate affair.

Only the rule of law can effectively protect both society and the individual.

I remind also that the happy ending to the situation created by the wicked was only possible thanks to the positive and responsible attitude to all Rwandans who refused support to the perpetrators of subversion. And while reiterating you my complete satisfaction in this respect, I would remind you that it is important that we remain vigilant in resisting any attempt of this kind which, by distracting the population in unnecessary and fratricidal struggles, would be highly detrimental to our national development goals.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

I take this solemn opportunity to convey my best wishes for the new year, to yourself, to all those who are dear to all activists and all the activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development.

I want this year to be successful, it is a year of peace and national cohesion, a pillar of development.

Activists, Activists, the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

You know that our most valuable asset is the ground. As I noted at the beginning of my speech, the birth rate of the Rwandan population croft faster than the pace of domestic production.

Also, do we devote all our energies to the preservation of this heritage.

In past years, we have focused our attention to the problem. So we named the 1974 crop year 1975, the increase of production; 1978, livestock with special focus on its support aspect to agriculture. Finally, in 1980, was named the year of conservation and soil protection.

Despite these efforts commendable addition, the results achieved are still inadequate. Therefore I request once again to all Rwandans, all Rwandese and to all who live in this country, to mobilize all energies again in the fight against erosion.

1982: STRUGGLE AGAINST EROSION

Rwandan soils occupy an area of ​​2,633,800 hectares of which 1,853,593 are only used for the purpose agro-forestry-pastoral. But the good soils have become very rare due to the unsound land conservation long been exploited. The degradation of our soils is mainly due to rain erosion, current research shows that the flow suspended solid in Rusumo that is to say the output of RWANDA is around 30kg / second. This corresponds to an annual loss equivalent to about 180 hectares of good arable land and fertile. This loss is reflected very often in the stripping of surface horizons of our soils and consequently in loss of fertility that inevitably follows.

The grid of part of the territory by ditches (with or without hedges) anti-erosion is to make (the asset's (colonial era. But alas efforts, assorted it is true, of physical constraints and moral populations had to be abandoned in the early years of independence. it is only since the advent of the 2nd Republic that the Government, aware of the seriousness of the problem, saw fit as maintenance of terraces the rational use of hedges, horizontal ridges and other resources necessary to fight against erosion and improving soil fertility are harmoniously integrated into the normal cycle of other studies characterizing a rational agriculture.

This is to fully implement this program the Government of Rwanda has conducted training, motivation and awareness of local authorities and farmers themselves. Thus retraining were organized, prefectural and local tours were conducted by the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock. Also this heritage protection effort "soil" has been and continues to be promptly stimulated and supported by the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock through national agricultural competition at all common to all sectors administrative and some farmers.

This training-awareness activity combined with technical assistance and equipment to farmers has led the field by a slight improvement in soil conservation. Until 1980 shows that only 23% of land has been protected or approximately 288 550 ha of 1,250,544 hectares of land under cultivation. It is understood that this percentage is still very low and that a vast mobilization of financial, material and human resources is absolutely essential.

Several methods will be used for this vast action that the mechanical means are an important .articulation: anti-erosion ditches stabilized with grasses with dense roots. Although they require considerable work and require regular maintenance they have the advantage of being known by the population.

Cultural methods are very important and should also be associated with other methods to improve soil structure and therefore their conservation. These farming methods relate to the use of organic and mineral fertilizers, mulches the use, the strip cropping (crops and fallow).

The very steep slopes are often land unsuitable for agriculture, but the improvement is still possible thanks to the action to undertake reforestation there. Thus reforestation ridges, plateaus and slopes with appropriate species is a strong support program and we wished that this activity continues to flourish over the years.

Bushfires, regionalization of cultures, overgrazing, livestock transhumance are themes on which the public must be educated to better management of available land. However the means to fight against erosion and soil conservation in general should be supported by the material and human resources that could be mobilized for this purpose. Local authorities need more than ever to be mobilized to support the efforts of the people, a very great consciousness must be taken by those leaders who should understand that the soil heritage is threatened. As for the population, it must come to understand that soil conservation is a matter of survival for an entire people, an entire nation.

The Government of Rwanda will continue to support the work of the people by creating reforestation nurseries, fields of multiplication of fixing herbs in making available technical equipment and personnel.

For this large-scale action and importance be made before it is too late, we need community work '' UMUGANDA "there are primarily being used. This mobilization of all forces of the nation in the work of protection and soil conservation must be backed by strong legislation thereto, and those relating to forest use and conservation.

Finally, it is highly recommended you do not stop at one year, but this new opportunity offered to us is the starting point of a new consciousness of our problems will lead us to the full protection of our heritage "GROUND". So we hope that this year 1982 at least the 6 priority areas identified in 1980 will be completed and three more will be started so that the work of protection and soil conservation, prior to any agricultural planning in Rwanda are completed during the third five-year term.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

The problems of development of our country are very complex and therefore can not find all the answers immediately. But what is important is that all Rwandans are determined to walk hand in hand, to fight against underdevelopment and thus seek better conditions for ourselves and our children. The road is long to go and full of obstacles, but impregnated * noble ideals of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, the Rwandan people is well equipped to achieve the final victory which is the creation of a just and prosperous society.

It is through our will to succeed, our genius and our own determination to pull us socioeconomic underdevelopment that we can keep intact the achievements of the Second Republic that are peace and national unity.

Thank you.

