Heads of State and Government, President Citizen, Comrade President, Royal Highness, Mr Prime Minister, Honorable Deputy Prime Ministers, Honorable Ministers, Distinguished Heads of Delegation, Members of the Diplomatic Corps and consular, Distinguished guests, Ladies and gentlemen, Militants of the MRND

On behalf of the Rwandan people, gathered in the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, and on my own behalf, I would like to welcome you, Distinguished Heads of State and Government, Distinguished VIP guests who have come to join to us in the festivals and events marking the 20th Anniversary of our Independence. Our desire is accompanied welcome our deep gratitude to our distinguished guests who accepted our invitation. The Rwandan people, who sees in your presence among us, the burning flame of the deep friendship between our peoples, will spare no effort to make your stay pleasant, within its means.

This presence is for us a sign of encouragement in our struggle for development and will, no doubt, to the strengthening of relations of friendship, solidarity and cooperation that so happily exist between our peoples.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

Twenty years of independence and freedom just passed. It's July 1, 1962, in fact, that the Rwandan people celebrated with joy and gladness, conquered the victory and freedom. Victory gained after many sacrifices. Popular and working people have endured for several centuries, injustices, humiliations of all kinds, exploitation by the feudal power enjoying the deliberate complicity of the colonial power. These injustices were denounced publicly for the first time in the history "of the Hutu Manifesto" of 24 March 1957. Alarm Cry, the manifesto called for respect for the human person, in the enjoyment of the most fundamental freedoms. "the current situation is largely the state created by the old sociopolitical structure of Rwanda, especially buhake (serfdom) and application thoroughly and widespread indirect administration, as well as the disappearance of some old social institutions that have been erased without having enabled the corresponding modern Western institutions to establish and compensate.

"Some people have asked if this is a social conflict or a racial conflict. We believe this is literature. In the reality of things and the thoughts of people, it is one and the other".

Cry claim, denouncing the political, economic and social monopoly and the monopoly held cultural then by the so-called master race.

Cry of hope and wisdom reflecting revolt against a political and social structure obsolete and presenting concrete solutions to real change.

"The first solution is a" state of mind ". That leaves the thought that Rwandan elites are only found in the ranks of one ethnic group." They denounced "chores" made in favor of the only leaders and called for "the people a minimum of freedom to undertake useful initiatives." they called for "freedom of expression, one of the foundations of a true democracy." and politically they claimed that " be codified laws and customs ... that education is particularly monitored. Not that we should fall into the opposite fault bantouisant where we hamitisé. That current social positions do not influence anything admission to schools. That craft, vocational and technical on-site or for the period ahead the first budget oriented. We wish qu'-incessantly ... each chiefdom is equipped with an advanced center of rural training of at least two years where primary education is extended (applied to life) and especially where it exerts a manual trade children do not access the secondary stage. "

But this cry was not heard. And the little people continue to cash ignoble and humiliating treatment. Arrogance, denigration, provocations were the origin of the popular and social revolution of 1959, by which the Rwandan people, long oppressed, could get rid of a rotten feudal power. The social revolution made it possible to build a democratic society concerned with the interests of the masses. This action was crowned so happily by the accession of our country to Independence, preceded and prepared by popular consultation.

First in July 1962, proclamation of independence of the Republic of Rwanda. historic day; day of gladness that put a definitive end to 400 years of medieval feudalism, four centuries of unnecessary and humiliating chores, four centuries of dependence.

The National independence allowed Rwanda to take place in the concert of free nations. Rwanda, the country was then called upon to contribute to building a world of peace, and was able to establish relations of friendship and cooperation worldwide. Our National Independence gave us a member of the UN family. She allowed Rwanda to be one of the founding members of the Organization of African Unity and of belonging to the Movement of Non-Aligned.

Finally, the independence of our country, put in the hands of Rwandans, the responsibility for directly managing the national wealth, to make it fruitful. It allowed to negotiate mutually beneficial cooperation to peoples become partners in progress.

We celebrate these twenty years of independence in glee. But the joys of this day, we remember with respect and devotion, fighters of the first hour. They who fought for the girls and the son of this country to enjoy their freedom. They have experienced hunger and humiliation.

Some have experienced torture, others have shed their blood together Let tribute to all those martyrs who without their bravery, Rwanda would not be what it is today, a free country, responsible for its future . I beg the audience to keep a minute of prayer for all the children of the homeland who sacrificed their lives in the just struggle for liberation of our people.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

Our country has experienced difficult times, the day before and the day after its independence; Armed terrorist attacks, manipulated by cynical old feudal, which were intended to destabilize the young republican regime. These guerrilla groups unrepentant sporadically attempted in July 1962 to 1967, armed actions against their own part, thus showing the world their spirit of hatred and division. But the members of our still nascent army, your children and the people who had to get rid of the shameful feudalism, all watching. Attacks fusing all borders of the young Republic were bravely repulsed. The shed blood of these worthy son of the country sauvegarda peace on each of our hills. Victory that allowed to consolidate the gains of the 1959 revolution and independence by setting up the necessary structures and infrastructure to harmonious development.

But if the action of our revolution, consolidated by National Independence was saving, regionalist concerns, referred bass and selfish, do not take long to threaten its achievements and provoke a desired disintegration of political and kept the forces of the country .

Regional monopolism on the government plan, injustice, selfish decisions bloodshed pushing the military to take control of the destiny of the country, the historical date of July 5, 1973. mainly moral revolution which allowed the restoration of peace and unity threatened and establish a sound administration, solid, competent and aiming a gathering of all the working parts of the population.

We said NO to this disintegration policy maintained by a handful of malicious and cynical. We said NO to a policy discord and intrigue. We said NO to the monopoly of one region at the expense of different values ​​spread over the rest of the country. We said NO to a new children's blood stream of our country.

The day after our moral revolution of 5 July 1973, we immediately promised the people to restore peace and national unity are essential to its harmonious and integral development and restore the game of "Democracy Leader".

It was therefore necessary to create a Democratic Movement Policy, which gathers and groups within it the forces of the country, without exception. We are indeed convinced that we can not achieve national development in the division, tearing and hatred among citizens. On 5 July 1975 the National Revolutionary Movement for Development was created and irrevocably condemned any tendency to separatist or racial, any attitude of superiority of one race, ethnic group, a family, a region of a religious denomination over others.

According to his manifesto, our movement is popular and requires unconditional acceptance of the population. "The behavior of the people, the whole society is a model for a single mold, hence unity of purpose, harmony, cohesion from the base cell to the top of the pyramid of the Movement, ie any the nation". The Movement proposes as its constant political doctrine, defending the interests of man and society in dialogue leading a fierce fight against any tendency to question the primacy of the collective interest over individual interest or limited to a certain group of society. "

True to this principle, the people of Rwanda has adopted a constitution in the constitutional referendum of 17 December 1978 and was overwhelmingly elected its President on 24 December 1978. The Peace and National Unity is the cornerstone of everything we do our Constitution guarantees public freedoms, protects the individual against anything that may harm their development and gives him and all the possibilities of working for the welfare of his family and the whole entire nation.

To complete the development of our institutions, the National Revolutionary Movement for Development took over the organization of the elections, since the selection process to the base, until the election, in order to prevent harm divisions and discord that competitors of the First Republic in search of votes, had sown among the Rwandan population.

This is to maintain a climate of peace and national harmony established by the Second Republic, the National Revolutionary Movement for Development took responsibility. While renewing my thanks for the confidence shown in me by all activists and all Militants of our movement, I wish that the same climate of peace and unity covers the presidential elections planned for late next year consultation will take place the same time as new elections to respect the provisions and spirit of our Constitution. So nine years a policy of peace, national harmony, tolerance and dialogue mobilizes the people of Rwanda for its own development. And seven years ago as the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, gathering body and mobilization, gave each and every Rwandan Rwandan weapons of struggle for a better future.

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

Twenty years is an age almost insignificant in the history of a country and a people. But despite the constraints of all kinds experienced by Rwanda, from independence to the present day, the courage did not fail our people which we never rondrons enough tribute. On the whole territory, actions show that the balance is positive. Who remembers Kigali in 1962? Small village where only a few houses were built only on the high plateau of Nyarugenge. Country lacks administrative infrastructure, energy and social, ten kilometers asphalted across the country, only economy based on agriculture, non-existent industry, lack of financial institutions to finance economic activities, was the face Rwanda at the time of its independence. But freedom was conquered infuse us new strength. An administrative reorganization was initiated by the creation of municipalities and prefectures. Later, in the early days of the 2nd Republic, the prefecture was doptée legal personality and common restructured to make the development of the basic cell. With peace and found National unity and reinforced by the individual and collective discipline, the restructured joint and better fulfill its mission to bring together and energize all the forces of the country.

The food and agricultural production has always been a concern of the Government. Over the past 20 years, this production has unfortunately not increased at the rate of our population growth. It is even unfortunate that the food production and consumption per capita have fallen short of internationally accepted thresholds. too rapid population growth resulting in less land for food production, non-agricultural employment few, continued degradation of our land, fragmentation of areas of crops without improvement Therefore ^ / cultural methods for greater intensification and better productivity, put under cultivation of marginal land previously reserved for grazing or forest, all of the main causes that hindered the alitaire production. Despite these shortcomings, it is pleased that the Rwandans do not die of hunger. The effort we started to make our people with adequate food will be continued and intensified in particular through integrated rural development projects. The fact that the primary mission of our National Development Plan Economic, Social and Cultural is meeting the food needs of the population is a demonstration of the political will to direct a much larger volume of resources to agriculture.

The same effort will be developed to implement, across community development centers and continuing education (CCDF), social systems which induce the peasant to achieve a higher level of productivity and raise its degree of aspiration for overall wellness.

The programs started building strategic stocks and cooperative silos will help us develop a more holistic tactic food security and price stabilization in domestic markets.

I take this opportunity to launch a new call for saving our capital soil threatened by erosion. Increasing food production is not possible without measures to improve soil fertility. The instructions and extension themes given population must remain the primary concern of the agents appointed to the supervision of farmers. The objective of producing more must remain a challenge for all Rwandans.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

Our Movement wants every citizen enjoys the best conditions to be useful to himself and to society by maximizing his physical, intellectual and moral. Our social revolution of 1959, was including the release of Rwandans of all ideas and obscurantist beliefs, the result of a long period of feudal and colonial. Educating our population and make it responsible for its development became an equally high priority. To create favorable conditions for improving the standard of living and welfare of the population, the state has developed land use plans by creating farming communities, and commenced an awareness policy to improve habitat. The houses of durable materials and semi-durable always increase more and more in our territory; tracks are drawn to open up municipalities and sectors; a water supply and improvement program sources continues and intensifies, health centers and feeding centers are built. The hygienic and sanitary conditions improve, allowing a population ever more healthy, to work for its development. In urban centers, the government made an effort to put in place administrative infrastructures enabling greater efficiency and profitability of services. Of housing were built by public and private services to allow agents to work in better conditions and thus improve performance.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

The Manifesto of the Movement said: "The family, mother cell of the nation, will always be protected" and that "the conditions likely to bring more harmony and well-being in the family will be improved in accordance with the principle the equality of men and women. "

It is happy to note that since the independence of the Republic of Rwanda, the family has always been of great concern on the part of officials at all levels. The Constitution of our country defines family rights. This concern is also reflected by actions promoting women and children. "Educating a woman is educating society" This belief was translated into action by multiple accomplishments including the creation of social schools, the oldest of which just celebrated its Jubilee 25 years. Setting up centers social, seminars and conferences for the advancement of women.

Meanwhile, a special effort was made to admit a larger number of girls in secondary schools, thus opening the access to the various higher-level training. Rwandan woman is able to make its contribution and participation in all areas of development, in response to the recommendation of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development Manifesto which states:

"The empowerment of women must bring new strength to participate in the acceleration of national development."

Promoting the child has in turn, led to the creation of feeding centers, whose aim is the improvement of health through theoretical and practical education of mothers.

Demographic problems and friction civilizations have prompted the Government to take certain measures to protect the family. The most important were oriented control demography, youth protection and preservation of our social and cultural values. The rapid growth of our population, linked to the scarcity of arable land is the basis of the creation of the National Population Office, responsible to seek and propose solutions to the demographic problem, especially in seeking a balance between the production and consumption. A people that does not protect its youth is a nation in decline. So we must intensify our fight against all forms of juvenile delinquency and against the acculturation, in defense of our traditional social values.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

From the birth of the republican regime, Rwandan officials have taken to heart the problems of education. This one had it not been a concern in the social demands in 1957? Since Independence, the Rwandan authorities are therefore aware of the need to redefine the national education policy with the primary objective of training and the intellectual and social development of the masses.

Malgré ces Efforts, chaos a small fraction of élèves fly, issue the offender, access enseignement secondaire, la plus grande partie retournant in the hills, he valable sans outil permettant ivories réellement helpful.

The inadequacy of the training then, the divorce between the demand for education and few resources to respond, the low yield seen despite high expenditure on education, programs and methods do not allow for achieve the objectives are all reasons that led the government since the advent of the Second Republic, to make a finding of unsuitability of our education system and propose necessary reforms.

The need to define the new objectives of education adapted to the needs and realities of the country, its development status and prospects of its development, is undoubtedly a reflection of the consciousness of a people and the expression of independence. This need to print a new stamp our teaching therefore reflects the unanimous will of the Rwandan people to make the school a center promoter of economic and social development.

Our hope is that students will come out of any training cycle, either primary or secondary, and that can not continue to the next level, may be useful, for training adapted to their level and abilities. In a predominantly agricultural country, we believe that education should aim at the formation of his youth to modern farming techniques and rural crafts. It is only on this condition that the young may actually become a true citizen promoter of development. Such reform is a long term task and that requires a lot of resources, material and human. The nation has made these resources but the remaining steps are longer than those already taken. Other sacrifices will be needed. Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, be proud of what you have done for your children, for your country, for Rwanda tomorrow.

The UMUGANDA was for us a real means of applying the principle to rely primarily on ourselves. In instituting we wanted to emphasize the eyes of all, the importance of manual labor for life, survival and the future of us all. We want Umuganda is done by everybody and that its benefits are for everyone. Umuganda is not only for the less fortunate or for the less privileged. Everyone must make his case.

We do not want a symbolic participation or passive presence, but we demand of each effective and visible contribution. Need I remind you again, Militants, accomplishments achieved through Umuganda? Those put it do not need the reminder.

We wanted Rwandans understand, once and for all, they must first rely on their own strength, their own production, before hoping to external aid, which sometimes comes late, and still insufficient for yet satisfy our many needs.

Umuganda should be understood as a material participation in the increase of goods that are indispensable and constant readiness to serve his country, always with the conviction that the development of a country is primarily the work of their children.

I remind all those responsible that such work is planned at the level of the family unit, Umuganda must also be at any level of administrative organization: cell, sector, town, province, public institution, government department and any private company. We do not want to see people arriving on site who find nothing else to do than indulge in pure gossip. I said in this very place, in other circumstances, that this planning should aim primarily the completion of the projects included in our development plan and the objectives and recalled periodically so that the Rwandan way, every day to its present state of underdevelopment.

J'ai dit également que la République, née de notre social revolution, in several parts of any forms and enslave slaveries in affirmé que chacun doit Chinese sans pit for the cuts of the interest on the interest manson individuel. Voila, disions-nous, the base of the Umuganda here has été Institue au profit du President de la Republique, in a kaftan, in a Prefect, in a bourgmestre to tell of loss or tell c'était le cas comme sous le régime monarchisten and Portuguese.

Also in the field of education, it is pleased that since our independence, enrollment in primary school have continued to increase. Since then to date, children enrolled in primary school have seen their numbers tripling during these 20 years.

Such an increase is mainly due to the democratization of education policy, business since the advent of our country to national independence. Secondary education has seen its population quadruple compared to 1962.

At the time of Independence, Rwanda had no institution that can provide higher education. Only some forty Rwandan had benefited from higher and university education.

Currently 1,215 students are enrolled in the National University of Rwanda in its two campuses Ruhande and Nyakinama. The University has already issued 1,463 university-level degrees. As the University continues its mission of intellectual and human promotion of the Rwandan people in whose service she devoted herself mainly.

The Higher Military School, restructured in turn in higher education, as senior managerial executives of the Rwandan Armed Forces.

Rwandans, activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

Rwanda is landlocked in the heart of Africa, has always tried to improve its transport and communications infrastructure, one of the most important areas of development country's socio-economic development. Because of this isolation, the share of road transport in the movement of import and export goods is important. Over the last twenty years, an adaptation of the national road network, but of international concern, was one of the priorities of the development policy.

Several projects have thus emerged, some have already been completed, others are in the process of implementation.

Regarding urban roads, Kigali in 1962, with only a few meters of paved road, is increasing with a dense road network, including planning, expansion and amenities to meet the growth of the urban fabric and development of urban transport. A careful observer will have noticed that since the advent of the Second Republic, alongside this effort paving and improvement of roads, municipalities, through Umuganda, built thousands of kilometers, and their disenclosing previously isolated areas.

Parallel to the development of road infrastructure and increased trade between different regions of Rwanda, transportation of goods and people has grown considerably.

In 1962, the Government is striving, with the few means available for the development of structures called to bring within the reach of the masses, the modern means of transport. It was established a public transport service and garage of the state service that has grown with a sizeable cartage. These resources need to be improved and expanded.

Domestic transport was a great progress since, thanks to the Umuganda communal roads were built. Small vans can now reach many parts of the country, thus promoting the development of regions which hitherto had remained on the sidelines of the country's economic activities.

But the disability caused by the isolation will always be heavy and hinder the growth of our economy by the importance of the cost of our exports and imports. The extremely long distances that our goods have to travel, causing delays also long delivery, are also exported our products do not bring us enough currency that we are entitled to receive. It's scary to solve this problem we have undertaken happy dealings with our neighbors for the facilities of transport and transit we are granted.

The infrastructure of the Kanombe International Airport, receiving in 1962 the unforgettable "DC3", have recently been strong improved to allow its access by large aircraft, while allowing airlines, national and international, friendly services. Part of this work is completed, the rest will be soon.

Still on the subject of opening up the telecommunications services almost non in 1962, experienced a remarkable development, an effort crowned by the recent installation of an earth station. Intercontinental communications are thereby improved, and geographic isolation, economic and social, especially lightened.

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

The socio-economic development is closely linked to energy problems, development of drivers. The energy problem is a big problem the independent Rwanda has faced.

On the eve of independence, Rwanda had only one power station with a very low power elsewhere.

The last twenty years have seen the completion of an additional energy infrastructure of generation, transmission and distribution. Thus power stations dotted around the country, have given more space to the national electrical connection network. Anxious to ensure the Rwanda endogenous development and self-sustaining, the Second Republic has undertaken a vast program to increase even more rapidly and the availability of the country's energy resources. The Central Ntaruka and interconnect it with the Central Mururu, the construction of the Central MUKUNGWA are signs that government policy on energy. Through these efforts the production of electricity increased by 10.4 million kWh in 1962, to 67.4 million kWh in 1980.

So that electric power can reach a large number of population and potential consumers a rural electrification program was designed and must be performed.

But the energy situation in our sub-region remains worrying. The rate of energy consumption is accelerating as to arouse some concern about energy supply in the near future. This serious reality should drive us to pursue joint actions with our neighbors, to develop and use of existing energy resources in the region, and this in a harmony of interest to all partners. Thus, to meet the future demand for energy, studies were conducted as part of the GEPGL and KBO for the development of Hydroelectric power of RUSIZI and Rusumo. The Hydroelectric power not however alone can solve all our energy problems. So we must apply ourselves more stubbornly looking for other energy sources. Our ambition is to develop a program that would allow electricity reaches every corner of the country by the year 2000.

Activists, Activists,

We have already said, the magnitude of the high population growth, coupled with an exceptional population density, and combined with several major constraints in mainly in production, explains the weakness and fragility of a balanced diet per inhabitant. Agriculture, although it occupies a privileged place in our economy, can not, by itself, solve the problems our country faces. The family farm has become so small that it can not use all the family labor.

We must therefore disgorge agriculture by finding other pursuits outside the sector. The industrialization of the country, which aims to produce locally substitute goods imports and essential good, can reduce the severity of this problem.

Since the country's accession to national sovereignty, the secondary sector has evolved from a very mixed way. Only a few small units of agro-industries could emerge and some small industries related to the construction industry. Extractive industries despite a reorganization of this sector (creation of SOMIRWA in 1973) and the construction of a tin smelter have not registered significant progress. It therefore seems necessary to leverage the enormous potential of a process of substitution of imports, especially as the high costs of transport are a natural protection, and that these costs reduce the competitiveness of Rwandan exports markets International.

We launch again, on the occasion of the National Day, a solemn appeal to private investors, domestic and foreign, to participate in the industrialization of our country and that they satisfy a demand for accelerated expansion.

The Government is working and will always strive to find them an environment as political, administrative and operational.

We hope that the effort is primarily directed investment towards the agribusiness sector and to the mass production of consumer goods.

Commercial and monetary matters, Rwanda inherited a difficult situation that: dominance of foreigners in the world of commerce, few major shopping centers, lack of road infrastructure, not financial institutions.

taking into account the real possibilities of the country. The principle of a balanced budget, as it was always imposed by our Constitution, was at all times strictly respected.

Moreover, by its austerity policy, the Government has always refused to unnecessary spending, pure prestige, or mere ostentation.

The austerity policy, the policy of a realistic and balanced budget were the basis for good management of our currency. It is noteworthy also that our country's debt policy has never ruled out the repayment term opportunities. Thus the stock of domestic debt currently accounts for only 18% of GDP and the debt service represents only 3.7% of export earnings. In conclusion, the economic reality of our country was still the only guide the Government in terms of spending.

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

If I was to trace along the great achievements that have influenced socio-economic life of our country, I again beg your indulgence to discuss constraints to our economy. Some of these constraints are dependent on our geographical location, such isolation. Others hold to the current international situation rather catastrophic. Still others result from the nature of man and those of us who have not yet released the indiscipline of carelessness and idleness.

The global economic crisis worries even the most powerful. The parade means that Rwanda has the most are that low. Added to this are the difficulties already reported due to our isolation, the imbalance production - consumption, lack of significant mineral resources.

It remains regrettable that some of our agents and our managers in the public and the private, rural and urban areas, peasant or intellectual, have not always been up to the tasks required them , preferring to sink into a negative indiscipline, carelessness in a destructive and often leads to idleness crime and banditry.

These past and present obstacles, internal and external, combined with these human weaknesses, did not facilitate the task of the young Republic twenty years old today.

Activists, Activists,

Barriers and constraints we were not prevented from continuing our journey. To improve our living conditions, we had all, provide much production efforts with the invaluable assistance of organizations and friendly countries. Since the independence of our country's gross domestic product continued to grow - growth that grows no exaggerated pride - but growth anyway, due to an internal investment effort, supported by the help of our friends . It went from 15 billion francs in 1967 at 108 billion in 1980: he figures must of course be analyzed by extrapolating the effects of monetary erosion, but the trend is still positive. This positive development of the domestic product has supported a pace so slow it was, improvement of living conditions of the population. The enrollment rate of 7 to 13 years of age was estimated at 41% in 1967 increased to 59% in 1980 and pupils in primary education 6 years increased from 344,000 in 1966/1967 to 622,000 in 1980 /nineteen eighty one.

Regarding sanitation, the vaccination program and the fight against endemic diseases and epidemics, combined with the improvement of environmental health still precarious but certainly clear evolution, allows to hope for good health general population. The development of sources of drinking water, nutritional centers and maternal and child health centers have the same objective.

To heal the sick, if the number of hospitals has not increased significantly over the past 20 years by one against medical clinics and health centers increased from 103 in 1967 to 326 in 1980. The medical staff and paramedics has also increased very rapidly so that a doctor who had a load of 64,000 people in 1967 has more than 32,000; still heavy rate certainly, but less heavy.

To remedy this situation several measures had to be considered including:

rwandisation the major instrument of trade beginning with the National Bank of Rwanda, whose mission remains to formulate monetary policy, credit and foreign exchange, to ensure internal and external stability of the currency. The creation of such an institution, then non-existent for our country entrusted under mandate of the United Nations and placed under Belgian rule, allowed the organization and financing of internal and external trade. It also allowed the establishment of banks and other companies. the introduction of Rwandan traders in the commercial circuit had the beneficial effect of birth and the gradual expansion of markets, shops, trading and commercial centers across the country. This allowed the supply of the population with various necessities, and causes the monetization of the rural economy at the expense of the barter system. Particular attention was paid to foreign trade. Not only could increase its volume, but also the opportunities and above all the supply routes experienced a great diversification. the birth and growth of business enterprises whose TRAFIPRO and more recently OPROVIA, had the effect of helping to stabilize prices.

Tourism, a factor of development of the country, was also encouraged. With the accession of Rwanda to independence any hotel establishment existed in Kigali. This necessitated a dynamic pulse to provide the capital and other parts of the country of reception facilities to receive tourists in large numbers.

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development,

The Economic and Financial independence is the essential basis of true independence of any country. Also, upon accession of Rwanda's independence, the state has sought to increase the economic and financial resources of the country, in order to have sufficient financial resources for development projects, and to support social actions and cultural.

It was first thought and then expand a nonexistent tax policy. It was also set funding priorities.

During twenty years of independence, Rwanda has adopted and followed a prudent and realistic fiscal policy

The maintenance and continuous improvement of the living conditions, satisfaction of basic needs, a healthy diet, decent housing, education adapted to the growing needs of the country, demanding an accelerated growth and diversification of the national production.

A mutation is required for the share of rural production remains dominant, be helped by greater participation of industrial production. The industrialization effort, although it is still low, is encouraging given that the country started from nothing in the industrial field.

The import trade reveals a still small but interesting trend decline in the share of imports mainly industrial goods (16% of total imports in 1967, 10% in 1980) in favor of capital goods equipment.

All these achievements, sketched schematically, were obtained thanks to the peace and public order. I can not help recalling here the role played by eminent how our security forces from the birth of our republic, the mother of our democratic institutions.

On July 1, 1962, with the support of elements of the National Police, the National Guard just to push the first INYENZI attacks infiltrated by volcanoes to undermine the National Independence and the first recruitment is dated March 1960, opens ceremonies that memorable day in perfect parade before the metropolitan troops which it will resume the mission. This is the unforgettable date of accession of our country to independence.

And it was June 29, 1963, that the National Guard was placed under the command of a Rwandan officer, from the first promotion of the School of Officers of Kigali. The numbers grow gradually, and executives are forming.

And organizational perspective, the specialized units are set up and logistics services needed to support a growing army are created.

In the field of Cooperation, Security Forces are then essentially supported by Belgium both personnel and equipment.

In 1972 broke out in all establishments school ethnic and regionalist revolts. The leaders will dot émeuvent. The riots continue and become widespread in 1973. The country was sinking into the abyss.

The intrigue and discord generalize, hatred and fear become mistresses of hearts. The National Guard could not sit idle before a chaotic situation and intervenes morale coup of 5 July 1973 to bring peace and unity, freeing the minds and hearts of the children of the nation's trauma the politicking and the disintegration of the Active Forces of the Nation. The Second Republic is taking over.

On 23 January 1974 the National Gendarmerie is created to take over some administrative tasks and judicial insured by the National Guard from the integration of the National Police. During the same year, February 2, 1974, the Armed Forces, climb in the front line in the struggle for development. This is the birth of Community Development work "Umuganda" to which all are invited, without exception, because development such as peace and tranquility should be everybody's business.

Pursuant to the order of the Head of State word, Rwandan women is integrated for the first time in the ranks of the Rwandan Armed Forces. Caria Defense of the country is the concern of all children in this country, regardless of gender.

It should be noted that from this period the military cooperation relations were formed and strengthened between RWANDA and several friendly countries. A grouping of policy units, acquisition of materials and equipment was continued.

On 8 January 1979, the special role assigned to the Department of National Defense was solemnly reminded:

improving the training of his men, reclassification of demobilized soldiers, protection of the law and the safety of persons and property, law and arms control throughout the entire Territory of participation in education of-school youth and to national development.

Since 1980, the Armed Forces conducted a fierce fight against crime and subversion which were becoming more alarming dimensions. The political serenity was defiled by people with inordinate ambitions that have managed to grow from some of their fellow feelings of discord, ingratitude and betrayal. Timely and prompt intervention of the security forces and the judiciary allowed to effectively control the situation.

The Armed Forces are engaged with the support of good citizens and administrative authorities and judiciary to fight vigorously against drug abuse scourge which, while not effectively curbed, could lead to a good portion of our population to crime, banditry and crime.

I appeal again to all security forces, members of the Gendarmerie, staff of prosecutors and judges, and all of you, Militants in your sectors, in your cells and your families for a more action increased struggle against all those who seek to live outside the law and seek to enjoy free of others' effort. That the law is necessary, in fairness, but firmly. Those who have mocked our multiple calls not expect forgiveness and they are serving sentences they will totally deserved.

Without it we would be dragged into a spiral of contradictions that I already stigmatized October 26, 1976.

No doubt the effectiveness of the Rwandan Armed Forces will always depend on their discipline, cohesion and loyalty, training and the remaining material means of course indispensable tools. We had faith and we took our opportunities and our yet limited means maximum performance. In our faith we have received the necessary forces to resist discouragement to a difficult task. All achievements, however modest they may be, that were made in this country owe their existence largely to the vigilance of security forces, so to peace and unity.

Le peuple rwandais line the toughness and his courage, search les Chaînes du féodo-colonialisme, a smith all forces upon here voulaient the remettre sous le joug du slaveries and line the difficulty, the vaincra toujours, comme Mansion in the intrigues, the Haines and divisions here in 1973 allaient remettre en question les acquis de notre Révolution de 1959 et de notre Indépendance Nationale.

Thus the Rwandan Army has always, with courage and dedication, to defend the country against external and internal enemies who wanted to undermine our democratic and popular options. Despite limited resources, it was able to organize, discipline, discarding regularly and not without regret harmful elements in its development and reputation. She had, when it was necessary, intervene domestically to restore order when it was threatened. She has continued to participate in the business of nation building while remaining in its primary mission of ensuring the safety of people and their property.

Security forces integrated within the people they emanate are the guarantee for us all, peace, tranquility, unity that we needed to get down to work building our beloved country .

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

We stressed, from the first days that the action of 5 July 1973 had been undertaken to fight against any act of hatred and division between people, ethnic groups and regions.

The policy of the 2nd Republic is built on a real and constant will to preserve peace and concord National. In my many interventions, I stated that "some ethnic, far from being the subject of separation must be for us an enriching element of the Rwandan society." National Revolutionary Movement for Development Principles are unequivocal on this issue. But the history of our country that a portion of our countrymen is abroad in the political status of "refugee".

actively engaged in a policy of promoting peace and rehabilitation of National Unity, with the corollary desire to develop and strengthen relations of friendship and good neighborliness, the Rwandan Government therefore can not ignore the problem of refugee problem is also one of the socio-economic phenomena of current concern to the international community and particularly the young states of the third world.

I therefore wish to remind the views of my Government on this issue that affects nearly our country, given the events that have marked its history on the eve and the day after Independence.

True to the spirit of international conventions adopted in this area and to which it adheres, the Rwandese Government believes that the problems of refugees must be addressed in an essentially humanitarian way but taking into account the imperatives of peace and security.

particularly about the Rwandan refugees, according to statistics currently available to us, they are a few hundred thousand settled mainly in neighboring countries.

Among them are unfortunately a minority of activists and agitators who still dream of returning to Rwanda by force and violence, abusing their hospitality accorded by the host country and deceiving their vigilance.

However, we are pleased that among the Rwandan refugees, more successfully integrate into their new condition, thanks to the facilities provided by their host countries deserving, as such our deepest gratitude and sincerest tribute to the humanitarian spirit and understanding they have shown thus.

We are also indebted towards these countries brothers and friends all the measures taken to face inclinations subversive actions and initiatives prejudicial to the security of our peoples, from the marginal refugees still would feed intentions malicious.

We strive for our part to deter attempts to subvert and harmful ambitions irredentist elements in the context of our policy of good neighborliness, friendship and brotherhood that we continue to develop since the advent of the Second Republic.

For those Rwandan refugees who, through understanding and assistance in countries of asylum, managed to establish a normal and peaceful era, the Rwandan Government supports the idea that they can settle permanently and contribute to economic and social development of these countries and ensuring their personal development and that of their families.

For those of them who wish to enter the country, I have to remind and underline the voluntary and individual character of such a measure because, in any case, no refugee shall be repatriated against his will, as no refugee can claim back by force to their country of origin.

For those among the Rwandan refugees, who then would seek their repatriation, their case will always whenever examined in the light of the provisions of the laws and regulations in force since 1966, as supplemented to date, inspired by international conventions Rwanda is involved.

The Rwandan Government will respect the commitments under these conventions, scoring its commitment to safeguard and promote a climate of peace and unity necessary to ensure the success of efforts to exit our underdevelopment of the country, as part a policy of bilateral and regional cooperation in which security considerations are a factor.

We know we can always count on the help of international agencies in this special sector to continue this policy.

Activists, Activists,

If we got satisfactory results, thanks to the efforts of all of you all, activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development. The Rwanda will be developed through the efforts of his own daughters and son.

But through the efforts of countries and organizations which friends we attended during these 20 years of independence. The Rwandan people are aware and grateful. These thanks are even deeper than those sacrifices were often made in a difficult international economic situation.

Our foreign policy has allowed us to expand and strengthen the circle of friends.

Rwanda has continued to implement its policy of opening to the outside, with its first neighbors, and with all those who want to respond positively to his friendship.

If the First Republic was mainly concerned about interior problems, the Second Republic, following the Moral Revolution of July 5, 1973, after, on the domestic front, restored calm and corrected some aberrations guilty, and clearly defined the objectives, restored the credit of our country to the opinion of the international community.

To consolidate peace and unity and promote development, my Government has relied on active diplomacy which, as I said in January, at the solemn inauguration of the National Development Council, "has managed to break the isolation channels ", making in Rwanda's rightful place in the comity of nations.

The results registered in this regard is largely positive, both for international relations in general and in particular regard to cooperation and development aid.

We can legitimately be proud before the substantial progress recorded and palpable, as so many commendable results of a called cooperation to develop. This progress results and give a special sparkle to the joy of this twentieth anniversary.

This pride is all justified this progress, however small they may be, are recorded when the international economy is marked by disorders that require deep reform and restructuring.

The Rwanda continues to add its voice to all those calling for the early establishment of a New International Economic Order more just and equitable, taking account of the real interdependence and necessary solidarity between industrialized and developing countries.

The Government of Rwanda believes that cooperation between developed and developing countries should reflect this interdependence and solidarity should be an instrument of their complementarity.

In my opinion, remember these principles in the course of a solemn anniversary that we celebrate today in Rwanda, it is on behalf of the Government and the Rwandan people, renew and underline the commitment to continue to work tirelessly for their application in the context of a more active and fruitful international cooperation.

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

In an international context which everyone knows contingencies and problems of various orders, crises and tensions fed by conflicts of interest and power struggles both economically and politically, Rwanda, reconciled itself definitively repudiated "empty chair policy" on the international stage.

We have substituted for the policy that an active presence and dynamic by participating more regularly in international meetings and conferences, receiving just as regular delegates and representatives of organizations and friendly countries and multiplying missions senior overseas.

It is in this spirit that Rwanda is pronounced unreservedly in favor of self-determination of peoples and it supports peoples struggling for recognition of their right to self-determination.

The victory of the newly independent African countries was greeted with legitimate pride, like that of all people who love justice and freedom.

In its unwavering determination to develop a policy based on peace, mutual respect, positive non-alignment on the understanding and the essential solidarity between peoples, the Republic of Rwanda is committed to consolidating the achievements of its diplomacy, focused on the promotion and strengthening of friendly relations with all countries that adhere to the same principles of international law, beginning with neighboring countries and then develop our relations with member countries of the OAU and finally with all countries and international organizations that contribute or may contribute to the development of our country.

The presence here today of the eminent Heads of State present here is the most eloquent expression of this desire to maintain and develop relations based on mutual trust and effective cooperation.

Membership of Rwanda to the Economic Community of Great Lakes Countries (CEPGL), founded in 1976, and the Organization for the Management and Development of the River Basin KAGERA (KBO), founded in 1977, reflects our concern for regional cooperation and regional dime.

I am particularly pleased to emphasize that the efforts and commitment have proven pay, which encourages us to continue in the same way to further develop our foreign policy.

The results already achieved fall, in fact, in line with our development objectives, these objectives remain based on a strategy that promotes maximum efforts nationally, to our means, both human and materials, foreign aid is primarily intended to provide the necessary contribution as a reinforcement and complement.

Paying tribute again to all our friends who have contributed to this progress, I express the same time the determination of the Government and people of Rwanda to further expand as much as possible, our circle of friends, in remaining faithful to the foreign policy principles of the National Revolutionary Movement for development Manifesto and pursuing diplomacy dedicated to the cause of development and rapprochement between peoples.

This is an opportunity to salute to all the dignitaries who answered our invitation to share with Rwanda and Rwandans joy they feel today.

The presence of our Brothers

Ndugu Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, President of the United Republic of Tanzania, Citizen Mobutu Sese Seko Kuku wa Ngbendu Zabanga, Chairman and Founder of the Revolutionary Popular Movement and President of the Republic of Zaire; Comrade Sassou Nguesso, President of the Republic of Congo; Mr. Daniel Arap Moi, President of the Republic of Kenya, as well as the Distinguished Representatives of many Governments and international organizations, reflects the degree of sympathy and friendship enjoyed by the Rwanda of today.

We draw a legitimate reason for pride, which encourages us further to continue our efforts in the service of sound policy of good neighborliness, friendship, cooperation and international solidarity. Let me also thank all those who, on this occasion, we have sent messages of friendship and encouragement. They are the expression of gratitude to all Rwandans.

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

After breaking the feudal and colonial chains, on 1 July 1962, returned to the people's dignity, maintained and consolidated the gains of the 1959 social revolution and the moral, the Five in July 1973, having completed the installation of sound Popular democratic institutions, renewed relations of friendship, understanding and cooperation with our foreign friends, neighbors or more distant, the Rwandan people must pursue the path of development with more courage and determination.

We are aware of disabilities that we surround and enclose us, but we are also confident in ourselves, in our courage in our ability to necessary sacrifices. And we know we are not alone. We have many friends.

Let us see the future with optimism.

That every Rwandan and every Rwandan keep present in his mind the sacred principles of our Movement: Unity in Peace for Development. I've never promised miracles.

And if they were to occur, they would be your work. Working in Unity, in dialogue, in the agreement and freely accepted discipline. Shaping the future of all our children and their descendants. Fight for the welfare, development and growth of each of us, that bright, happy and prosperous, the people of Rwanda.

