Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

On the occasion of this day traditionally reserved for the Festival of Rwandan Forces Years, it pleases me to mention, again, for the benefit of my compatriots and friends here, the role of the Armed Forces in national life, in their dual capacity to guarantee peace and security, but also factor in development.

It was given to me on several occasions since the advent of the Second Republic to highlight the importance of the mission entrusted to our Armed Forces, and the degree of integration and participation in the National family. I had, on many occasions, to express my appreciation for the successes, and to lament the shortcomings. I had to congratulate and encourage the best and the worst resume. Point is therefore need to extend myself today. Indeed, should we still remember the events that have made the history of older Rwandan Armed Forces today 22 years?

Should we still talk about the heroic moments of pride and opportunities that have marked our country's life?

I ask rather than those who lived them and to those who have learned not to forget them; because, forgetting the past, we risk relive because you failed to learn lessons for life.

Many to this day, those who answered the call of the country to offer him a part of their youth. Some of them have distorted our company for not having understood the essence of our mission; but many have resisted and continue to serve with courage and dedication. I encourage them to persevere always going to the peaks in the performance of their duty status.

This solicitation is for all: the elderly and young alike, executives like soldiers. All they know they will be judged for their behavior and their actions. Within the Armed Forces, as in any national community, it is discipline, sense of duty and performance which decide between the one and the other bringing forth the best.

It is neither easy criticism or peddling rumors, or collusion with various influences, which emphasize the value of each, but the transcendence, the priority of duty over the facility, a perpetual discount subject oneself to avoid leaving a vain complacency. There is no greatness without constant renewal for a permanent update.

I especially ask the young officers who come to take the oath of allegiance to the Republic, to involve this target today: they retain forever a well understood discipline and voluntary diminishes person and that in this matter the individual responsibilities are heavier for those who hold a part of the command.

Always look for harmony and cohesion of the body to which you belong, rather than individualism and anonymity that borders on indifference. Never forget that the example is the greatest teacher, and that perseverance and consistency have, mostly, because of the biggest obstacles.

Come join the effort and contribute to the progress of the Armed Forces and the country. But the important thing is not the number; it's more effective in the discipline. Command must always ensure decrease in unjustified presences ranks. A more thorough recruitment at all levels should also be able to prevent many losses.

Young comrades, for your future, for your career, remember to give ease and refrain from letting go even if some around you make their rule of life. Hang instead to the effort, emulation and a more ordered existence and demanding of yourself. It is on this condition that slowly but surely you pluck the ripe fruits of your labor and your tenacity.

Activists, Activists,

It is common knowledge that the festivities of this day are more modest than usual. It is that it is a transition between the special sparkle usually coated by the day and the purely internal to Military Camps which now will be his. And several reasons including those limiting public spending. Nothing much to begin closer ties between the people and its Armed Forces since the work of Community Development and other public events are privileged occasions for contact and communion in the same ideal of peace, unity for development.

Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, Activists, Activists,

As you have already learned, since October 2, we are witnessing a large influx of people from Uganda, a country with which we have excellent relations of friendship and fraternal solidarity.

The problems with this situation concern us at the highest point.

Past the surprise of the first few days, the Government of Rwanda, which had been so taken aback by the scale of this movement of populations has priority attached to the organization of rescue and emergency measures, with the generous and effective support of countries and international and charitable organizations.

We do not hide our partners concerns about this unexpected situation.

Our call was happily heard by several countries and organizations asked friends to help us, given the scarcity of our resources, to support emergency measures to support tens of thousands of people.

On behalf of the Government and people of Rwanda, I wish to express sincere thanks to all the countries and organizations that we are assisting in these circumstances particularly difficult for a country that is among the poorest in the world and whose usual problems well known, including:

the small size of the territory, the population explosion, and means which dramatically limited, do not allow it to ensure the reception, maintenance and hosting a large mass of people that we would not be in able to settle permanently in Rwanda.

Our country continues to rely on the understanding of the international community to resolve hardware problems we are forced to face.

Beyond the immediate problems and to develop a sustainable solution, Rwanda expects to take advantage of its policy of friendship and good neighborliness.

In this context, we have already committed and led the necessary contacts and negotiations with the Ugandan government.

Contacts and negotiations will continue to achieve satisfactory results, both for the people concerned that our two countries must, in these particular circumstances, strengthen their solidarity and demonstrate their genuine will to conduct a policy of good neighborliness with their development and security of their populations remain dependent.

In this regard, it is my hope that the proposals of Rwanda will benefit from the attention and understanding our partner in strict compliance with international rules and our legitimate interests.

I would also like to reiterate that my Government will spare no effort so that peace and tranquility that prevail in our country so fortunately did not suffer from the problem that I just mentioned. I therefore appeal to all civic activists and all the National Revolutionary Movement for Development activists for the purpose of promoting safety in our country and in our sub-region to be fully safeguarded and that development remains for all, the first concern in our daily tasks.

Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, Activists, Activists,

I would like, before concluding this address, once again express the gratitude of the people of Rwanda to all friendly countries that provide valuable support to our Armed Forces and help create the conditions for development.

We continue to count on their active solidarity, we are convinced that the interdependence of peoples. These countries know through their representatives to that Rwanda has, besides its limited resources, to order various episodic difficulties, often beyond its control and despite his good toward all.

The people of Rwanda remains committed to peace, supporting multiple benefits. This peace, the Rwandans want to "all other peoples. This desire for peace and stability is not a simple speech, he reflected in the behavior and actions of everyday people of Rwanda. May all people and all races aspire to peace and to grant each other. So everyone keep this unique right on his property, his home, and that of watching over his family. Thus all countries are always conscious of maintaining good neighborly relations to enable their peoples to work for their well-being.

I add my voice to those of all who love peace and freedom to appeal to the universal conscience for all people, all people homeless, freedom, wandering here and there in Africa, the Middle East and elsewhere in the world are no longer left to their fate or destiny thank you. Otherwise what use both the continental and international organizations if they could not impose ethics, a code of conduct to be observed by all. Peace as a collective individual is a prerequisite to the happiness of individuals and peoples. Peace is the weapon of men of good will, and people of Rwanda is one of them. We hope therefore that he be permitted to all men of good will to live in peace.

Long live peace and understanding between peoples.

