Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

There are two and a half years, we gathered in this room. Then we were talking about the progress made since the creation of our Movement, July 5, 1975, and especially since the Congress in November 1978. We also reflected on the new actions needed to strengthen the ideals of our movement.

According to Article 18 of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development statutes, we meet again. For first we welcome the results achieved through our strong determination to get out of underdevelopment. And also to lay a new foundation that will allow our people to work harder for his own fulfillment. It is in this spirit that I address to all of you here and all those you represent the salvation of our Movement: PEACE, UNITY, DEVELOPMENT.

Militants of M.R.N.D.,

An event like this is for us the ideal opportunity to remind us of the principles and ideals of our political organization.

The Manifesto of July 5, 1975 is instructive. Each of you has taken the habit to read this important document which is our charter. Force me, however, is to remember and emphasize certain key principles that form the backbone of our policy.

As everyone knows, the M.R.N.D. who for eight years, playing a catalytic role, has continued to guide and enlighten us in the development effort is our primary goal.

Development for the individual and collective well-being; underpinned by development that the prerequisites of peace and unity. These essential pillars of development are promoted by our Movement which wants to act in harmony and tranquility of heart. Yes, peace is essential, as the nation building can not be achieved in "tearing and hatred among citizens". It is obvious that no sane man can not talk. Vigilance is needed to keep the torch of peace and that peace must be translated into national harmony without which peace would be an empty word.

PEACE I say, I say UNITE principles that I constantly remind the Rwandan nation. The unit is necessary because the development we seek can not be achieved in the division.

If I encourage you, activists, militants, consolidate our peace and unity, I do not forget that you have shown, in the space that separates us from the III Congress, your determination to work towards that teaches us the manifesto of our Movement. I congratulate you and ask you to rejoice.

Pursuant to Article 7 of our Constitution, the National Revolutionary Movement for Development is the policy framework without which no political activity can be exercised. Every Rwandan is a full member of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development.

To achieve the goals of our Movement, which are contained in Article 2 of its Statute, we set up a whole organization whose base is the cell. And for this organization to be effective, requires that all members undertake, individually and collectively, to promote the ideals of our movement. It is for this reason that every member is a militant that is to say, it manifests an intense activity in the service of M.R.N.D. A militant struggle to prevail Peace and Unity. One activist banned forever hate and intrigue to devote himself to any action likely to radiate happiness and progress wherever it is located. An activist works and provides his country's soul and energy. An activist is always ready to defend the interests of his fellow citizens and his country. This means that one who cultivates selfishness and laziness, he who sows discord, which sucks the efforts of others who sheds the blood of his ilk, that one is against the teachings of our Movement.

A true activist passed the collective interest before their own interest, always has the taste to serve, educate and train. The Movement wants honest and dedicated men who work not just to accumulate wealth or enhance their prestige May * to propagate the ideals contained in the Manifesto for everyone to turn them into everyday lifestyle. Members of cells Committees must ensure that the political leadership is more effective and efficient. The Movement political ideology has been traced; it must now be put into practice, to live for it to be a daily reality that underlies all our actions.

Militants of M.R.N.D.,

Our Movement is revolutionary. He asks each of us to break with the obsolete behaviors to build a new society. This revolution is a long-term task, because the change in attitudes and mentality is not through speeches or by a boost. The determination in action, perseverance, courage and boldness to be the foundations of our revolutionary spirit. The creation of a new type of society requires the support of all, commitment and mobilization of all our efforts.

The Revolution wants our movement must not remain in the philosophical principles fixed. It must be reflected in all our actions, and be realized by hard work. The Manifesto M.R.N.D. says that "the place for every citizen of Rwanda, is the action which gives it its rights and freedoms." We express this principle at work, both intellectual work as manual work we revalue in the Works Community Development. And this work is not only a manifestation of our philosophy, but they are above all a symbol of a nation by building a united people.

Only work can lead to the development of the individual and society as a whole.

To achieve this growth, cooperation is needed to avoid both the frustrations and anarchy. Thus any action to be taken in common should be a sincere and democratic discussion, only likely to reach a consensus in order to achieve the best results.

Constant contact between leaders and covers only this. So all our consultations should they lead to careful planning of our actions. This should first aim at the welfare of the concerned. It must then win support massive populations. And this planning presupposes good design actions to take and examine ways to implement, considering the wishes and aspirations, opportunities and outcomes. Achieving the goals should be supported by regular monitoring. Finally, and this is often forgotten, evaluation is also a necessity, it enables development workers to celebrate the results achieved or readjust the goals to the means available.

The evaluation was a noted deficiency, especially regarding the development of Community Works. All managers must ensure there for the future. So consolidating dialogue for action to ensure the sustainability our responsible democracy.

Activists, Activists M.R.N.D.,

At our last meeting, we, in accordance with Article 19 of the Statutes of the Movement, made resolutions which should allow rooting deeper ideals of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development in the daily habits of the Rwandans. The Secretary General, in the report of the Central Committee that will introduce you, will you know the status of implementation of these resolutions. But in my case, I would like to take this opportunity to give you a few lines, the life of the Movement during the 2 and a half years have gone by.

The Manifesto of the Movement asks us to build in Peace and National Unity a genuinely democratic Republic supported by a people united disciplined and aware of its responsibilities .. True to this principle, I am pleased that the Peace and National unity prevailed in the country. This peace and this unit that we hold dear must remain engraved in our minds and guide our actions. Since the historic date of 5 July 1973, we wanted that peace and unity are the ideal sought by all. The harmonious development of our country can not do, and you've found yourself in the tearing or hate. This is why the motto of our Movement: PEACE, UNITY, DEVELOPMENT ". The wide majority of the population understands this fundamental principle of the Republic and even of our movement and we should be proud.

The National Revolutionary Movement for Development Manifesto proclaims that "peace and tranquility will be a constant concern to protect citizens against the security disruptors". The Rwandan Armed Forces, aware of their duties towards the Fatherland and their integration with other active forces of the nation, have never divested of their usual task enshrined in the Manifesto of the Movement. They have taken on different occasions, and despite the difficulties of various kinds, their task as guardians of peace, tranquility and integrity of the national territory. The fight against banditry and other troublemakers have continued unabated and in collaboration with the public and the various authorities both administrative and political.

The Third Congress of M.R.N.D required all attendants agencies to public tranquility to pursue and prosecute the thieves, criminals and other disturbers of security. He demanded that judgments are delivered and executed quickly while complying with the law. The H Congress condemned again any trend likely to revive hatred and discord among the various components of the Rwandan people. Years Forces have sought to enforce this resolution of Congress. So that over the past three years, they have remained in the gap to prevent and counter acts of ill will. Number of bandits, thieves and criminals were apprehended and brought to justice. The Government has established Centers of Rehabilitation and Production to redress vagrants and delinquents so that they learn to work and live honestly from their own efforts. The constant concern of those responsible for the security of all is to guarantee everyone the necessary peace for a conscientious and successful work. Every citizen must be able to rest after his work which he has the right to freely enjoy. So it took a struggle against banditry that was becoming more alarming dimensions. To mark the 20th anniversary of our national independence, I welcomed the effective action of the Security Forces when I found that the results in this area was positive during the period since our country regained his independence.

However this 20th anniversary was not the end of our efforts to safeguard the gains of independence. Rather, it is a new beginning for better organize and strengthen the fight by all means of preventive preference, including improving education and training of men in the Armed Forces, the search for materials and equipment; participation in the supervision of school youth both within the Civic Youth Service in the rehabilitation centers and production, the farm but benevolent presence near the population and nerve centers.

This is the essential missions of the Armed Forces in terms of protecting the integrity of the national territory, fight against vagrancy and crime prevention. Only justice has the power of repression, in which it becomes a necessity. The collaboration of the forces responsible for security has never failed in the search for criminals to bring to justice. It is the same vagrants pre-offenders that security forces had interned in rehabilitation camps or return to their homes. This decision sparked malicious criticism from some domestic and foreign media.

Such rumors are orchestrated by uninformed people but also by the enemies of our youth. We remain committed to continuing this work of recovery in the hands of the youth who is an invaluable strength and that is the future of our country. Do we still remember that "youth must be protected against all evil currents that can affect his personality and cause its disintegration and that the fight against crime can not bear fruit without the mobilization of youth, or without a better supervision "! Our youth must be put to use for the maintenance of peace and for the development of the country. This mission is, moreover, devoted not only to the Armed Forces, the main guardians of order and peace, not only to youth, rising force still dynamic, but also to all strata of the population.

That's why we always call not only to all Security Forces to the public prosecutors and courts but to all citizens in their areas, their cells in their families for more concerted action and increased the fight against addiction, source of crime and banditry, and against all those who seek to live outside the law to take unfair advantage of another's effort.

Our people has never spared his support to the Armed Forces. The history of our country testifies to sufficiency. The tendency to individualism and even the indifference of some must be fought for the highest qualities of our people are safeguarded. At the time of the fight against attacks from the outside to alienate our independence, the people acted in concert with our young army to defeat the enemies. When moral revolution of 5 July 1973, the people remained alongside the Armed Forces to consolidate peace and national unity. Until recently the country was faced with a particular situation we imposed by an influx of refugees from outside. In these circumstances, the Armed Forces have once again received the support of the people by his calm, wisdom and courage.

We maintain our position reiterated on January 8th 1982. The national territorial integrity, security and public tranquility and well-being of the people of Rwanda will remain a constant concern of the Rwandan Armed Forces for which the country will still make sacrifices for their provide the necessary tools for their mission.

Militants,

The work and effort make the healthy mind. It is in this context that with the advent of the Republic have institutionalized Even we UMUGANDA to give honor to manual labor he had lost. You all know the results that we got through the UMUGANDA. It is thanks to him that we have built schools, health centers, roads, administrative centers. Reforestation, the erosion control would not have been possible without the participation of the UMUGANDA. Money alone can not develop our country and besides we have not sufficiency. This is why we need to double our efforts and energies to use our arms and intelligence to the development of our beloved country.

We read in the manifesto of our Movement in the restaurant under the effort of all kinds, the M.R.N.D. consolidates the safest and most sustainable value that guarantees the prosperity and security of the economy: "work is seen not only as a right and a duty, but also as a moral quality that participates in the personality and the dignity of Rwandans again. "

And, remember again, the UMUGANDA must be planned so that it can achieve its dual objective: to develop our country by providing the necessary infrastructure to its economy, and that allow the new Rwandan s' fulfillment through work. Therefore it must be oriented directly productive activities. For development projects to be carried under the UMUGANDA increase, the mobilization and sensitization of the masses is needed and M.R.N.D. provides an appropriate framework to do so. The UMUGANDA must be a priority of the animation themes. In my speech of January 8, 1982 on the occasion of the solemn opening of the first session of the National Development Council, I am at length on the role of animation in the socio-economic life of our Nation. I would not come back, if not in its inspiring appearance. The animation is an externalization of our commitment to the ideals of M.R.N.D. and a revaluation factor of our culture is also a factor to the development since the word joined the action. The animation and within this latter aspect should aim at mobilizing people for a common ideal, that of improving their living conditions. Simple animation themes and easily acceptable by the population must be found. These themes popularized and should aim to protect and improve our soil for sufficient food production, improving and increasing socio-cultural facilities (health centers, water supply, schools, CCDF) and finally the economic infrastructure (roads, silos of storage). With animation and adequate supervision, the public will better understand the goals sought and thus participate voluntarily and massively to the proposed actions. In search of these animated themes, a special effort of imagination therefore seems necessary that every Rwandan is aware of the current situation in Rwanda and that it will face in the near future. Animation must open our eyes to this situation so that every Rwandan knows that his behavior, if properly directed, can usefully contribute to their well-being and that of his entourage. The UMUGANDA and animation are not a matter of a particular category of people, everyone should feel concerned. The survival of our country, our children should be a daily concern of the members of our movement and therefore must guide our current and future actions.

The visits that the highest officials of the Movement perform across the country have no other purpose than to awaken people's consciences so that they engage body and soul, to the development of our country. I visited the Prefectures in the preparation of the Five Year Plan II and I made contact with the people in my regular rounds in the development projects. The Secretary General of M.R.N.D. and ministers continue to visit the municipalities to encourage the people in their development effort. We will continue to listen attentively to the aspirations of the people to better direct our actions and realize how the slogans that we run each year and constitute animation and mobilization themes are executed. We can unfortunately not deplore the inertia of certain municipal officials who do not care about the welfare of the people entrusted to them. We restructured the town to make it a pole of development. But we find that the management of some of them is poor. At our last meeting, you asked the Government to intervene to help the poorest communes out of the financial impasse in which they find themselves. Given the special situation of some of them, the C.N.D. decided to give a grant of 135 million francs.

The Central Committee discussed the issue and recommended that the Government of other complementary measures, such support arrears owed by municipalities to the Social Security Fund of Rwanda, the debt discount related to the business tax, rebate debt common to the Municipal Development Fund. The Government will implement the recommendations. But no action will overcome difficulties facing municipalities if officials do not improve financial management, in particular by covering all available revenues and making expenditures against forecasts arrested.

Militants of M.R.N.D.,

The III National Ordinary Congress of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development have arrested a number of principles which constitute the hinge of Rwanda's economic policy. I would again like to quote them for you better keep in mind:

The economic and financial independence is the basis of true independence. The economic development of Rwanda will be provided primarily by work, and especially manual labor. Planning is needed to accelerate the country's economic development. The policy of austerity in public spending must be maintained and strengthened to avoid wasting development factors. The country must rely primarily on these own resources before seeking outside help. The country's economic organization must conform to the ideals of M.R.N.D. By adopting these principles Movement is firmly committed to promoting economic development and social country to increase self-reliance and promote an endogenous and self-sustained.

The implementation of these principles began. Thus all sectors of the national economy the focus was on a minimum of autonomy, knowing that in principle there are objective limits to total independence in economic terms; it is not to be confused with autarchy be impossible in today's world.

Our economy is based primarily on agriculture. This is why a particular effort has been directed towards this key sector. The deficit in food production can lead us to a growing dependence vis-à-vis imports of food, creating a hemorrhage of currencies and thus compromising the momentum of our economy. Producing more is for Rwanda a matter of survival.

Despite significant money supply injected into the agricultural sector, Rwandan agriculture has unfortunately not yet crossed the traditional bar. soil productivity is dwindling due to overexploitation, because of rapid population growth. The most recent achievements (1981) for an estimated population of 5,424,000 inhabitants, are 4,715,759 tons of food production, on a planted area of ​​1,059,495 hectares and 49,545 tons of animal production.

It should be noted that production and yield tend to stagnate. It was necessary to use some imports, particularly of cereals, sugar, salt and dairy products. The total volume of imports of food products represents, for 1981, 1.3% of total food production.

However, many efforts have been made to stimulate increased production fluctuates a lot in recent years because of the eco-climatic adverse conditions. To these hazards must be added other factors including:

the traditional agricultural tools not adopted the use still very limited agricultural inputs such as improved seeds, pesticides, organic and chemical amendments, the low level of technology in rural often impervious to innovation following the past secularly accumulated. extension workers and supervisors who are few and mostly poorly trained, poorly motivated and have insufficient means.

In terms of fishing and fish farming, several activities were carried out in order to increase production. The different fisheries of the country which supplied 1,200 T, currently at 2,000 t of fish per year. fisheries development projects have emerged and are now operational. These include fishing at Lake Kivu, funded by UNDP and the Government of Rwanda, Fishery Lake IHEMA, conducted with the assistance of Belgium.

In fish farming, the number of rural ponds has increased from 1,800 to 3,000, with a total area of ​​250 ha, excluding nursery centers prefectural and sub-prefectural reaching an area of ​​about 50 hectares. New species of fish were introduced into Rwandan wildlife for diversification. This is the common carp of Korean descent whose dissemination in ponds exceeded more than 300,000 fry while grass carp reaches its reproductive stage.

Jointly funded by the Government of Rwanda and USAID, a national fish farming project that will set up an extension service of fish farming and the construction of a fish instructors training center has just started its activities. A rice association program and fish farming as well as that of the transformation of wetlands into fish agro-systems should be undertaken because our country has a lot of potential in this area.

These efforts to overcome these constraints have resulted in the execution-up agricultural and pastoral projects throughout the country, which are nevertheless still not sufficiently armed to deal with this situation, they are oriented towards the intensification of agriculture which remains the one last chance of survival for the Rwandan population, intensification has not, however, reached a sufficient profitability. It is therefore necessary that a new food strategy to be defined in a concrete action program to ensure the quality and quantity of the food ration to the growing population. Ongoing discussions held between our Government and the Commission of the European Communities to set this food strategy give us much hope.

The proposed strategy provides for the gradual transition from more intensive agriculture and integrated into current exchange. This strategy is an agriculture capable of feeding a population of 9.5 million people in the year 2000, a strategy whose main axes are:

Maintaining and increasing soil fertility, associated with recovery of new marsh land and dry valleys and the intensive exploitation of the land assets. The systematic enhancement of food and animal production by a commercial policy and adequate storage and the development of agro-industries, Harmonious policy of opening up and interregional trade.

The short-term action plans to implement the strategy are:

The need to strengthen technical and financial support for the OPROVIA to allow it to better support and organize marketing. This support will be accompanied by the adoption of a policy of price and storage conducted at national level and the development of agro-industries capable of providing added value to the production of farmers and rural farmers, the need to develop and restructure extension, to protect and conserve the land and prepare to agricultural intensification. There is an urgent need to reorient agricultural research, as it is important to establish a consistent policy of conservation and improvement of soil, saving the consumption of firewood, to recover the land available to develop the service selected seeds by providing it with adequate staff and resources necessary materials to the role assigned to it; improve tooling growers; to provide farmers timely pesticides, chemical fertilizers and amendments, to show farmers how to produce and use organic manure and provide farmers the necessary veterinary products.

All these actions will, we hope, achieve in the short term (1986) a food production of 5,240,390 t and animal production 68675 T. Thus the daily nutritional requirements of the Rwandan population will then 6396000 residents could be fully satisfied.

In forestry, there are more than a century, Rwanda was with a forest cover covering a fairly significant proportion of its territory. But two important factors, namely: the population explosion and ranching were so accentuated in recent years as huge areas of forest were sacrificed in their favor. Thus there was colonization, excessive rate, western and eastern parts of the country to the point that the currently wooded area represents only six percent (6%) of the total area of ​​Rwanda This low percentage reflects eloquently the wood shortage of heating and service that is currently in our country. To overcome this deficiency a reforestation effort was undertaken.

The Government, with the help of friendly countries, Switzerland, the Federal Republic of Germany, Belgium, Holland and with the help of International Organizations, UNDP, FAO, the World Bank has undertaken a vast program reforestation.

Through forest projects installation and integrated rural development, the situation of our forest heritage had an outstanding evolution.

The reforestation effort was marked also by the institutionalization of the National Tree Day is for Militants and activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, a day of forest achievements and at the same time a symbolic day initiating a chain of reforestation activities (maintenance and exploitation of woodlands. Since its institutionalization in 1976, a production of seedlings as fruit that has enabled us to create more than 16,000 additional hectares, bringing the total area occupied by the artificial forest about 80,000 Ha. But the road is long, very long. we have to keep walking. the creation of 49,000 Ha in this five-year period must be for all Rwandans a short-term goal. So it remain only about 21,000 hectares of land for forestry. thus he was asked the Ministry of Agriculture and Ele husbandry to promote the creation of individual woodlands grouped areas and communal.

So we hope that the efforts begun in reforestation in addition to those made in research on the use of peat, biomass, solar energy and the valuation of different waterfalls in our country.

I can not conclude this intervention on agriculture without mentioning again the problem of banana in Rwanda. I clearly expressed my concern about the land grab by the banana, especially the banana wine. I listened to the arguments that were rétroqués me. But I am far from convinced of the economic viability of the banana in its current operations. Yes, "the banana is the cow of the poor", but also take care that cow. Plant banana so it rationally, both in terms of technology and in terms of the maximum area to book him. And I remain convinced that the uncontrolled expansion of banana wine remains detrimental to the development and growth of Rwanda.

Our Scientific Research Institutes, our higher education institutions understand our anxiety and help us to determine the measures studied, appropriate, propose to the population problem.

In order to improve the food situation of our country, the prerequisite therefore is the demonstration of political will to direct a much larger share to agriculture, to pursue policies that encourage farmers to produce more to achieve a much higher level of productivity. This is what I have stopped doing since I am the head of this country, by launching words of each year order that revolve around agriculture, institutionalizing Umuganda and creating the Office for the Promotion and Marketing of Products and Vivriers Animals (0-PROVIA).

For an effective agricultural revolution is established, it is necessary to involve young people and to stop the rural exodus. To this end, coaching youth at local level must be better fleshed and yards fasts multiplied for these young people who are the hope of tomorrow can already used their talent to the development of our country.

It is in the interest of greater food production and policy to promote integrated rural development projects continued. These projects are the development of different sectors of activities in rural areas.

The integrated rural development as a policy to increase food production and modernization of rural areas, is a recent introduction in our country.

The programs in this area were born after the advent of the Republic linked, especially with the start of the OVAPAM in 1974 and redirecting former regional development projects such as agricultural project forest Kibuye (PA K- PPF) and the agro-pastoral Nyabisindu project.

Defined as a means of integrating measures in production, infrastructure and socio-economic facilities in an area or region, integrated rural development is focused on the following priority actions:

the agriculture association, reforestation and livestock through the implementation of agro-pastoral or forestry-agricultural programs; the balanced development of food crops and cash crops; increasing production by improving agricultural labor productivity and soil performance; preserving crops and the organization of transport and agricultural products marketing channels; making available to the population of basic equipment and consumer products; the implementation of socio-economic infrastructure and facilities to improve the living conditions of the rural population; diversification of rural activities by the artisanal and agro-industrial development.

For operations concerning development of towns in the same prefecture or a few prefectures, had to establish regional development agencies with administrative and financial autonomy, supervised by Management Committees or Councils of directors whose members come from various ministerial departments concerned by the integrated rural development. This multi-sectoral and multidisciplinary composition of members and ensures collaboration and coordination of administrative, technical and social.

Nationally, in addition to the relevant departments of the Central Government, other support mechanisms have been gradually established, including: the Municipal Development Fund, Banques Populaires for savings mobilization and distribution credit to encourage the initiatives of the population in the area of ​​development projects. Thus a large integrated rural development projects program reflects this government's commitment to lead the people of Rwanda towards food self-sufficiency.

The OVAPAM, the agro-pastoral project Nyabisindu, agricultural and forestry project of KI BUY E, the overall development of Kibungo, development BUGESERA-Gisaka-Migongo (BGM), the development of the Zaire-Nile, the agricultural intensification Mudasomwa and Karago-Giciye agricultural intensification Gl-Korongo, the integrated development of Butare, the integrated development of Byumba, are all already operational projects on the way to be. The current negotiations are hoped funding, within a short time, for an integrated development of the prefecture of Ruhengeri and Gitarama Prefecture.

This list of regions covered shows that since the advent of the Second Republic, efforts were made for each prefecture can have an integrated rural development program, the long-term goal is to cover every municipality of the country.

And the Government attaches great importance to the role played by this program.

The IIIrd National Development Plan 1982 - 1986 determines the position of regional development: "The II Plan, without claiming to solve completely, during the period 1982 - 1986, the imbalances still exist at the regional level will be fixed as a guideline improve throughout the territory the distribution of benefits and benefits of development. "

The strategy for the rural development sector is related to the spatial planning must consider the following:

Consider specializations and complementarities between different regions and between urban centers; Identify programs regions; Do not concentrate only in urban centers, infrastructure and socio-economic facilities such as means of transport, water and electricity, health services and education, post and telecommunications; Develop plans Directors for urban centers, taking into account the rural environment; Consolidate Rural Habitat facilitate the making available of the population of infrastructure and basic socio-economic infrastructure; Ensure regular connections between different regions; Implement land reform designed to: Exploit optimally all arable land; Limit the total of land by non-farmers; Operate land consolidation.

implementation of the instruments of this land reform remain the land code, the educational map being prepared, soil classification according to their vocation, the establishment of a rural cadastre and registration of land rights.

Finally, decentralize development initiatives at the municipal level by: better coordination of municipal services; greater participation of developing joint operations; an adjustment of communal resources to financial need.

This brief overview of the ways and means for the implementation of rural development, integrated shows that in reality the role of programs in this field in national development is crucial for several reasons, the main ones include:

These programs cover more than 95% of the Rwandan population living in rural areas; As part of the planning, integrated rural development allows for a balance of infrastructure and socio-economic facilities between town and countryside. This helps slow migration to urban centers; Regional programs involve the rational exploitation of the potential of each region; through regional specialization particularly in the agricultural sector, thus creating a certain division of labor in the exploitation of national resources. Insofar as the beneficiaries of integrated rural development are together the main actors of the projects, the mobilization of human resources is facilitated.

Indeed, knowing she must first rely on its own forces before resorting to the assistance of the state or foreign aid, the population participates in the development of a realistic program and seeks to promote not only the most-have but also wellness. Thus are made the promotion of the whole man and the optimal and coordinated use of multidisciplinary teams of technical staff, administrative and social.

Activists, Activists,

The agricultural sector can not alone solve the problem of rural incomes. Therefore the Third Congress stressed the need to gradually create jobs in industry and crafts. The possibilities for massive job creation in this sector are still very limited; projects that were retained have used beheaded-intensive technology, not labor-intensive. In addition, people who had savings oriented to have the property report, the transport and trade of redistribution creating few jobs. In the opening speech of "ECONOMIC DAYS" December 11, 1982, I asked the Rwandan businessmen to cease to be interested exclusively for commercial speculation, real estate and transport, to face key areas such as industry, finance, hospitality and public works. I hope the appeal launched them and the measures contained in our industrial policy will encourage developers to design projects that meet our concerns.

With the advent of the Second Republic, the work has returned the honor that he had lost, especially manual labor. At its first ordinary meeting of this year, the Central Committee of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development has had to consider in particular the problem of the country's lack of interest of the population for manual work, especially in the rural areas where young people and men tend to leave these women alone irreplaceable occupations. The rural environment that sustains the country in its vast majority is abandoned by the very people who are able to develop. We want Rwandans recognize reality. We said the Five in July 1982: the Rwandans lived through manual labor and he will live a long time. We need food and it must be produced, which implies the use of the hoe, machete and other implements; we need a proper home and we need to build with our hands; we need hospitals, health centers, schools that we must build ourselves; we need roads that open up our towns and our hills, we have to treat them; we need to reforest our country and we must prepare the seedlings, transplanting and planting.

At the moment the Government is committed to promoting employment, which must be an opportunity for social development worker, which excludes its use, it is unfortunate that the press has gained ground and handicapping services and decreasing and labor productivity. An attendance at work was recommended in the various meetings at all levels of the organs M.R.N.D. On the other hand to increase working time and productivity in rural areas, a regulation on bars and restaurants is about to be completed.

Anarchy recognized in this sector promotes crime, laziness, banditry and constitutes an obstacle to the peace and tranquility of the residents. The planned measures will combine the local authority for granting permission for such operations.

Outreach visits were conducted across the country to encourage people to work and an interministerial commission was created to examine the case of agents that do not give the desired performance. Once the findings are known the Government will not hesitate to depart from the administration.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

The Third Congress of the MRND, after noting the repeated failure of companies and cooperatives belonging to national and considering the need for such associations to the rapid development and self-reliant national economy, recommended the Government to examine the causes failures recorded in order to take measures to make it more effective and more viable these economic associations.

Although Rwanda, due to its ancestral tradition, is naturally oriented towards the pooling of efforts in various areas of manual labor, safety and social relations, a mentality has not yet created for fruitful collaboration financial to promote modern economic activities.

Furthermore ,, the members and managers of national business associations are not educated enough on the exact nature of their responsibilities.

Finally it seems that the legislation does not take due account of the special situation of Rwanda in the creation, administration and management of commercial companies and cooperatives.

The Act of 22 November 1966 Cooperative Associations is being revised to adapt to current realities. Actions in the field of training also prove indispensable. We believe that the Training and Research Center of Cooperatives play a key role in this area.

The restructuring of the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Rwanda as recommended by the Third Congress of our movement has been made. We hope it will better guide the business and to train traders in the spirit of its mission as described by Decree-Law of 6 January 1982.

Since the structures of the Chamber of Commerce and Industry are in place, some initiatives have been recorded. And it is encouraging that the company initiatives of my direct reports, I wanted to meet with businessmen and industrialists working in Rwanda.

The IIIrd Congress reaffirmed the principle of democratization of credit so that it reaches all backgrounds and all regions of the country. The ideal is far from being achieved.

Available statistics indicate that the share of credit reserved for the agricultural food production is too small and the very marked trend remains that of concentrate loans in the city of Kigali. This alone accounts for 88% of total outstanding loans. The remainder is distributed, insignificantly, among nine other prefectures. The figures confirm that there remains a structural imbalance in the credit allocation system, and that an effort is still required to make the necessary corrections.

Banking institutions should assist the government in its determination to develop the country. It is also emphasized that the small business is often neglected by commercial banks while everyone knows its importance in the national economy. I ask these banks to remain attentive to the needs of small traders, by relaxing lending conditions by the simplification of formalities.

The Chamber of Commerce and Industry shall in turn organize training cycles for these small businesses so they can better control the management of their businesses.

The democratization of credit can not achieve its goals without a sound policy of regionalization. Interest rates should be studied and fixed so that those who invest in rural areas are encouraged. The credit should not be oriented only towards real estate. But a studied distribution must encompass all production sectors hitherto forgotten: agriculture, livestock, crafts, small businesses.

The Rwanda Development Bank and Banque Populaire are most concerned with the need for such a pulse. Let me here three reminders. The first managers Banques Populaires for they pursue the extension of the network of their location across the country. It is insufficient that only 59 of 143 of our towns are served by Banques Populaires.

The second reminder is for state officials in the Executive Boards of the banks. These representatives must always defend and communicate our partners the Government's policy on credit.

Finally, it is important to remember that credit can not be free. It is not to be confused with a grant. It must be repaid. In other words, one that solicits must measure every chance he has to pay and work accordingly.

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

Since the advent of the Second Republic, I have many times, defined the broad outlines of our foreign policy. Let me now turn to the elements that marked our diplomacy in the spirit of the resolutions and recommendations adopted by the Third National Congress of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development.

In this regard, the positive results I have presented to you at the Third Congress adds new data to the consolidated strengthening the gains already made in the context of our external relations increasingly successful and constantly developed over the years.

The third Congress had stressed that our country should focus on maintaining and expanding relationships that maintained within the international community, to strengthen and expand our circle of friends and partners.

It is in this perspective that should place the major events that marked the Rwandan diplomacy since December 1980, including missions abroad, at various levels, the visits received in our country, and the decision open this year a resident Embassy in Saudi Arabia with jurisdiction over the Middle East. This decision, which is part of our policy of openness, shows the interest that the Rwandan Government attached to the active solidarity between developing countries in general, and particularly the Arab-African cooperation.

Regarding foreign visits, I would mention in particular those that I have personally performed in Kuwait, France, Uganda, Algeria, Congo, Belgium, People's Republic of China and the People's Democratic Republic of Korea .

Beyond the visits of a bilateral nature, Rwanda has actively demonstrated its presence in the concert of nations, participating in international conferences and activities of organizations whose purpose and mission is to promote the regional and sub-regional .

So I attended the conference on the least developed countries organized under United Nations auspices, in Paris, in September 1981, the conferences of Heads of State of France and Africa, held in Paris in 1981 and in Kinshasa in 1982 and at the top of OCAM in Yamoussoukro in 1982.

I also participated in the eighteenth OAU Summit held in Nairobi in 1981.

Regarding the pan-African organization, I must emphasize that our country attaches great importance to achieving the goals it aims to promote the benefit of African peoples, both politically and socio-economically . It is in this spirit that Rwanda regularly participates in OAU conferences and supports any action and any action likely to consolidate its core principles and strengthening its credibility.

At the regional and subregional level, our country is making every effort in order to strengthen the organizations to which he belongs, starting with CEPGL and KBO, of which he is a founding member and whose seats are based on our territory.

Cooperation programs that these two organizations are responsible for implementing integrate in the filling, the actions of a bilateral nature that fall within the neighborhood policy.

While reserving priority to the CEPGL and KBO, Rwanda is in favor of the integration policy adopted as a development strategy across the African continent and which, according to the Lagos Plan of Action, cover the creation of regional and sub-regional cooperation to establish, in time, an "African common market '.

Convinced of the rightness of this strategy that can give concrete dimensions of solidarity and complementarity among African countries, the Rwandan government has closely followed the negotiation process that led to the creation of the Preferential Trade Area for States the Eastern and Southern Africa. I even participated in the Second Conference of Heads of State and Government of the countries members of the PTA, held in Lusaka in December 1982. And especially in the month of May, in Addis Ababa, on the sidelines of ceremonies of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the United Nations economic Commission for Africa, I officially announced the accession of Rwanda to the new economic package that is of interest for the development of our country and have completed the signing of its constitution.

Moreover, always in the spirit of the Lagos Plan of Action, Rwanda signed the Libreville Declaration establishing the principle of the creation of the Economic Community of Central African States will constitute a new economic package that will do no prejudice to strengthening existing subregional organizations.

The desire for openness constitutes a fundamental element in our foreign policy has consolidated the credit which our country enjoys in the community of nations especially since the advent of the Second Republic.

In addition to the results achieved in terms of cooperation and development aid, contacts and exchanges of visits which multiply in this regard are a testimony more convincing.

Since the previous Congress, Rwanda has had the honor to host the Presidents Daniel arap MOI Kenya, David Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia, Jean-Baptiste BAGAZA Burundi, Mobutu SESE SEKO of Zaire, Julius Nyerere of Tanzania, Denis Sassou Nguesso of Congo, the French head of state Francois Mitterrand, Prime Minister Mohamed BEN HAMED Algerian Abdelghani, Prince Albert of Belgium and several other dignitaries representing countries and organizations friends. Among these personalities. Mr. HUVELLIN, President of the French Center for Industrial Promotion in Africa, Mr. Edgar Pisani, European Commissioner for Development, Mr. Ernest Stern, First Vice President of the World Bank, Mr. Paul HARTLING, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

The sympathy which our country enjoys with its partners has manifested with a special sparkle to the celebrations commemorating the twentieth anniversary of our independence, given the number and quality of the distinguished guests who have shared with us joy of this anniversary: ​​in total, we then received forty delegations.

The same sympathy manifested itself with the active participation of our partners in the work of the Third Round Table of External Aid organized in Kigali in December 1982.

This meeting allowed our various partners, organizations and friendly countries, to reiterate their permanent availability to support Rwanda in its march towards progress. So for me today, a solemn opportunity to renew the deep gratitude of the Rwandan people to all those who contribute to the development of our country.

Activists, Activists, the M.R.N.D.,

All the considerations that I have just mentioned, as a reminder, are part of the fundamental principles advocated in foreign policy, by the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, and meet the resolutions and recommendations adopted by the Third Congress .

This is the place and the opportunity to stress that Rwanda will remain true to its foreign policy inspired by the fundamental rules defined by the United Nations, with particular emphasis on the objectives of good neighborliness and openness to the world, to promote an ever more active and active cooperation with other neighbors, with other developing countries and all peace-loving country, freedom and justice.

Rwanda also continue its unwavering support for the efforts of the International Community to the total liquidation of foreign rule on the African continent, respecting the principle of self-determination of all peoples and the safeguarding of peace and security. Thus, our country supports the peoples of Namibia, South Africa, Palestine and Western Sahara in their legitimate struggle to enforce their fundamental rights.

The results achieved, either as part of bilateral cooperation or in the framework of multilateral cooperation, demonstrate the correctness of our options that Rwandan diplomacy devotes effort required in order to strengthen still further the positions already acquired our country in the comity of nations.

These options are always guided by the principles of morality and international ethics, as enshrined by the UN Charter and for ensuring the best conditions for the progress of humanity.

Politically, the realization of this goal for the benefit of all people, is heavily mortgaged by the tensions and conflicts affecting several countries and regions in the world.

Faced with these tensions, in unison with other countries loving peace and justice, Rwanda still will support any initiative and any action likely to actually promote the spirit of relaxation and guarantee peace and well the security that all people need to devote to the tasks of development.

Economically, it has become almost commonplace to evoke the imbalances that currently characterize the structures of international relations governed by a system that maintains and develops the sidelines, constantly growing, between the industrialized world and the immense majority of developing countries.

The Rwanda believes that the revival of the North-South dialogue should help to identify ways to implement to curb this trend and ensure the establishment of a new international economic order which takes into account the needs and interests of all partners .

It is in this spirit that our country integrates international cooperation with other major objectives of its foreign policy based on peace, mutual respect, positive non-alignment on the understanding and solidarity between peoples.

Militants of M.R.N.D.,

Speaking of the foreign policy of our country and international cooperation, I can not ignore an important event that occurred last year on our border with a neighboring country and brother Uganda.

At the beginning of October 1982 30 256 Ugandan refugees, saying driven from this country have found refuge in northeastern Rwanda, with some 45,000 cows. Rwanda, which is party to international conventions on refugees, faced the situation by mobilizing all means at its disposal to help come to such a large number of displaced. Outside help us spontaneously was granted. This is the place to publicly express here our gratitude to all friendly countries, the United Nations humanitarian organizations and non-governmental organizations that have responded generously to the appeal launched by the Government, by granting these refugees, humanitarian emergency care.

At that time the Government was organizing emergency relief, diplomatic action was undertaken with the Ugandan Government to find a rapid and definitive solution that would alleviate the suffering of displaced persons while restoring interested in their rights.

Over the many contacts we have had with the authorities ugandaises we were led to understand that for the Ugandan Government, Mutara refugees were "Rwandan citizens who have returned home." Thus, based on the joint statement prepared with difficulty to GABIRO, it was agreed to conduct a systematic identification of refugees to establish their nationality.

I must here pay tribute to the Ugandan Government for its prompt action, which put an end to the exodus.

The results of the identification, conducted by Rwanda in accordance with the conclusions of the meeting of G AB I RO, were communicated to the Ugandan part. The ugandaises authorities granting no credit to these results, it becomes necessary to hold another meeting in order to define the practical measures for implementing what had been agreed to GABIRO. The negotiations take place in Kabale, Uganda, under the chairmanship of a high official of UNHCR.

Rwanda and Uganda in Kabale took the following commitments:

For the Government Ugandan:

commitment to proceed with the cooperation of UNHCR in the identification of persons in the refugee camps in Uganda and that of refugees displaced during the events of October 1982 as well as that of those who were affected by these events. the commitment to develop, in collaboration with the UNHCR, a solution for refugees and displaced people in Uganda who do not wish to enter Rwanda. commitment to apply the universally accepted procedures for voluntary repatriation of refugees. commitment to proceed with the cooperation of UNHCR and the Government of Rwanda, to the identification of persons in the camps in Rwanda, who say Ugandan and wish to return to Uganda. commitment to accept voluntary repatriation, Uganda, the people in the camps in

Rwanda and Ugandan whose nationality has been determined by this identification process.

For the Government of Rwanda:

the commitment to develop, in collaboration with the UNHCR, a solution for refugees and displaced people in Rwanda who do not wish to return to Uganda. commitment to install those of them that will be recognized as its own nationals.

Consecutive identification operations decisions laid to KABALE permetront to clarify the situation of refugees and to avoid confusion inherent in the fact of belonging to the same culture without facing the same nationality.

Through these commitments while refoulement is excluded. The eventual repatriation must be voluntary and will make reference to internationally accepted procedures. The Rwanda would accept voluntary repatriation for those that have found to be of Rwandan nationality.

Recall that the international conventions and national laws may not allow any refugees to return to Rwanda at its sole discretion without the interested party has complied with accepted procedures and without that Rwanda has agreed to repatriate each refugee who wishes must request in writing through the HCR channel.

The agreement KABALE concerns that refugees and displaced persons during the events of October 1982. And the agreement is based on respect for the freely expressed will of each refugee and every displaced person regarding his possible return in the country which he calls nationality.

Under the agreement KABALE, Rwanda and Uganda have pledged to avoid unilateral decisions that have consequences for either country regarding the movement of people.

It is to emphasize the active work of UNHCR whose wise response was complete negotiations and constitutes an additional guarantee, in addition to the mutual desire of both Governments to the regularity of operations of identification of resettlement or repatriation of refugees and displaced persons.

In terms of Rwandan refugees living in Uganda or other countries, Rwanda reaffirms its commitment to international conventions on the subject, including the principle of voluntary and individual repatriation and the national legal texts.

It would be unrealistic to ignore the existence of the problem of Rwandan refugees. But it would be equally unrealistic to ignore the smallness of our territory does not allow the Government of Rwanda to consider mass repatriation.

The problem of our refugees can not find a solution through cooperation between all members of the OAU, to integrate the host country, or where the situation permits, a return voluntarily and individually request. The Rwandan Government will do everything to continue to support this policy.

Militants of M.R.N.D.,

The Movement wants every citizen enjoys the best conditions to be more useful to society by maximizing his physical, intellectual and moral. This joins our political will to take the people from ignorance to enable it to increase its welfare and to achieve its full potential.

The effort of awareness and training of the population made since the advent of the Second Republic already starting to bear fruit since the Rwandans involved himself to improving their living conditions.

To supplement the efforts of the Rwandan Government has undertaken diverse actions in the rural areas.

Thus the continuous water supply program. We can cite as an example the water supply in South Mayaga, water supply to the island of Nkombo; completed studies on the treatment of wastewater from Kigali to the renovation and extension of drinking water networks in five secondary centers (CYANGUGU, Kibuye, Kibungo, Ruhengeri, RWAMAGANA) and in the lava area. The improvement program of small sources continues. But it is regrettable that despite the sacrifices made by the people and the Government of the bad people destroy the sources and fountains depriving the drinking water of good people concerned about the interest of their families. It will consider assigning to the cells and the care sectors to protect these water infrastructure. So they will try best to track these criminals.

In health, the Government always advocates mass medicine, preventive, why we multiply the construction of health centers and nutrition centers. The Government also supports traditional medicine.

He believes that this is one way to develop local resources for the benefit of the population will in future save of major currencies. It is also necessary to master the technical and scientific contours of this medicine. Besides the hospitals extension program that already exist, there should be emphasized that after the last Congress, we inaugurated the rural hospitals and KABAYA NYAGATARE and soon Hospital GATSIBO is operational. During the same period, more than 20 health centers were inaugurated. We have firm promises when in hospital funding Kaduha and CYANGUGU.

In the program of administrative buildings, several municipal offices and district courts were inaugurated; 22 Sub-prefectures are already created: some are completed, others sites; two prefecture offices, Gitarama and Ruhengeri, were inaugurated; that of Byumba is completed and others will follow. The prosecution Kaduha and the Court of Appeal CYANGUGU, are under construction and finally the construction site of the Ministry of the Interior and the Civil Service ahead normally.

Modern means of communication are the fastest way to collect information and for the population to communicate. The Government, with the cooperation of the countries and agencies friends started a program to modernize the country's telephone network. Improved roads continues. KIGALI - Gitarama - BUTARE - Akanyaru - Kigali - Ruhengeri -CYANIKA - BUTARE - GIKONGORO - CYANGUGU are new areas added to our roads covered with asphalt. We hope to start soon the road paving KAYONZA - KAGITUMBA while we seek funding for road Gitarama -RUHENGERI.

Militants of Mr. R.N.D.,

At our last Congress, the problems of education have provoked heated debates strong, showing the importance of this sector in the socio-economic countries. These discussions have enabled the Government to feel better the various concerns on this matter. That is why he organized a public debate on these issues, debates full franchise, or Prefectural Congress have issued strong recommendations helpful.

In compliance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Rwndaise Republic recognizes that education is an indispensable factor of general and harmonious development of human beings. Accordingly, the National Revolutionary Movement for Development is convinced that social development, the country's economic and cultural demands resolute action of raising the general level of education.

Considered the essential component of the national development policy, education policy is therefore a coherent set of values, fundamental options and strategies to guide the education of the type of man that society needs. Also based on the principles expressed in the manifesto M.R.N.D. the Rwandan education policy should aim to "the formation of responsible citizens, technically capable, morally balanced and mindful of the nation's interests." It should place special emphasis on the development of physical skills and the acquisition of intellectual and moral values ​​which Rwandan society needs for its overall development.

Our education system has been reformed to allow each winner of a training cycle to integrate into the community. Thus, the primary school and the integrated rural and craft education preparing to rural life that most children lead, as the high school prepares to live and serve in rural areas and provide middle managers, technically competent while higher education must aim to train senior managers motivated willing to devote to the people of the service without the guidance which the development would be compromised.

Education and teaching therefore must contribute to the training of citizens sufficiently fulfilled and able to participate in the development process as armed productive workers of technical knowledge, and professional practices that raise the welfare of the population. Thus defined education policy must be based on an Action Plan based among others on criteria objectives of access to various levels of education, rationalization of the school map, training and staff development, financing education. And I know that these issues were the subject of recommendations at the last Congress.

Rwandan political educational aims fully democratic. Rwanda has banished forever any system that would tend to favor one part of the population of any kind whatsoever.

Because the country opts for a democratic education, professional and technical than General, the Government will continue to make priority efforts to help people in extensions and construction of primary schools. It will continue to invest in the construction of rural education centers and integrated craftsmen and in both upper secondary schools to expand their capacity and increase opportunities for vocational training. Also she is the rationalization of the school map an indispensable tool for better geo-demographic balance and equitable distribution of human resources.

The education program that the Government has set can not be achieved without qualified personnel in sufficient numbers, which is why the training and development of the staff remains a priority. The expensive education. Also funding for the implementation of educational objectives it must be supported by all those who profit, the State and Society, given their resources and share the responsibilities of each.

These, in return, the principles you have already arrested during the sitting of the Third Congress that guided the departments involved in the development of the bill revising the law of 27 August 1966 on National Education of the Republic of Rwanda and draft statutes of teachers. These texts, if you remember, were sent to the prefectural Congress commented that the final preparation considered. After final review by the Central Committee and the Government, these texts will be filed before the National Development Council.

Militants of M.R.N.D.,

Since we separated, several projects have emerged thanks to the full cooperation of every son and daughters of this country, thanks to the creative imagination of the Rwandan people and with the climate of understanding and brotherhood that characterized the period.

Our duty since the historic date of 5 July 1973 was to safeguard the peace both at the borders and inside the country.

At our last meeting in December 1980, I would have shared the broad guidelines of the Third Five-Year Development Plan Economic, Social and Cultural. This plan was developed in accordance with your recommendations and in the spirit of Our Movement Manifesto which states: "The planning is the instrument for organizing action to achieve the goals of development M.R.N.D. The national economy has to be organized following periodic planes so that national resources are used rationally to meet the ever growing needs of the masses, and so that no sector of the economy is overlooked. " And as planning must take a democratic and become the business of the nation, the Government conducted a public consultation at the Communal and Prefectural Congress. The desires of the population have been carefully noted that they are an integral part of the Plan.

Following the recommendations of the II National Congress lem of Our Movement, the first mission of the Plan is food self-sufficiency in quantity and quality. I have already described the food situation of our country, I will not return.

However, we can say that, thanks to the efforts, Rwanda has managed to date to ensure sufficient production to feed its population. But the balance is too precarious and in the process of breaking, not only because of the adverse weather conditions, but also because of exceptionally high population density.

Soil fertilization, intensification, enhancement of food and animal production, opening up, the development of a strategic food stocks are all axes that can effectively contribute to the success of a food strategy.

Militants of M.R.N.D.,

I also want to remind you briefly of our other missions Plan that is already in its second year:

The promotion of employment that can provide sufficient income to meet the basic needs of our population.

Our economy is mainly based on agriculture, intensified this must go hand in hand with better use of the available labor force, decreased disguised unemployment and increasing income. The highly labor-intensive projects will be favored, especially those that create permanent infrastructure having a beneficial impact on the rural economy. I quote here reforestation projects, erosion control, hydro-agricultural development of marshes, building roads etc ... The population explosion has led to excessive fragmentation of agricultural land, which makes the surplus labor has to find work outside the agricultural sector. This is why the promotion of handicrafts production and service should be encouraged. In our five-year plan, we have given to industrialization a decisive role not only for its effect on the satisfaction of basic needs of the population, the use of local natural resources, modernization of society, but also the creation of jobs. It is through his work that Rwandans can find happiness and that of his family and thus contribute to the development of our country. Recall that the industrialization of Rwanda is not the case of the only foreigners.

The training - training that will enable everyone to fully play its role in economic and social life.

The full development of a people can not be done with the participation of $ masses. This is why educate and train is not a choice but a duty of social justice.

Youth must participate in rural development. She must feel fully responsible. Also his education, particularly that of non-school youth, is imperative. This education should focus more particularly civic education of youth and its preparation for working life in the country. That is why the youth should receive basic training in agriculture, crafts and the cooperative movement. Also the state he will continue to develop at the communal level training centers to allow youth to flourish and gain a level of instruction necessary for the rational exploitation of its level.

I wish that all officials understand the role expected from the youth development and its full integration into the country of our development process.

I followed closely the conduct of the 2nd Seminar for youth leaders held in Kigali from 23 to 27 November 1982. As I said in my message to the participants at the seminar, "Youth Rwanda is, its importance in our country, its dynamism and aspirations, promising future: it is undoubtedly the Rwanda of tomorrow. Therefore, it is one of the main drivers of the development of our country. "

I urge the leaders to draw the conclusions and recommendations of the seminar to better encourage, support and promote the creation of socio-economic groups of young people and to devise concrete action and realistic for a good preparation of the year international youth (1985).

Improving the health status of the population. The health policy of Rwanda during the Third Plan will be oriented towards mass medicine. The infrastructure must be expanded and intensified training of qualified personnel to meet the ever growing needs. Improving living conditions will also be directed towards the promotion of a habitat with a minimum of comfort. Although in our country we note some progress in the construction of houses, the construction program is still hampered by the high cost of materials. Whether in town or in the countryside, only those who have high incomes can afford to have adequate housing Therefore, it will be essential to implement the rural employment generating projects and income, to democratize housing loans and focus on using local building materials.

Road infrastructure, energy, administrative and other measures should be planned so that they constitute a pole of development and promote the reunification of the habitat.

We especially encourage young families to opt for this form of cohousing and failing of it for a Home on a path of easy access. As the master plans of the various major centers of the country have just been approved, the National Planning Committee and Regional Development will address the design of master plans of other secondary centers this for a harmonious development between urban centers and the countryside and to develop essential infrastructures for the urban population. We then soon include energy measures that must be taken to avoid an uncontrolled rural migration, eliminate the increasing rural disguised unemployment and especially the fragmentation of farms into viable entities for agricultural and food production increased more.

I would recommend for your consideration all the problems and all the measures proposed by the 1st Seminar on Spatial Planning, organized in the month of March on the initiative of the Ministry of Public Works.

Militants,

The population explosion, the growth of urban centers that cause behavioral changes will prevent and control to avoid adverse effects and the collapse of our society. We must draw the necessary forces in our culture. "The development of the Rwandan culture must be directed towards the formation of the committed man, proud of his country, released the legacy of feudal customs, any complex and prejudice." In this perspective cultural policy must link culture in personality development and economic and social development. The education of the population and especially of the youth must be strengthened so that everyone can have an effective weapon to fight against underdevelopment and to all activists of the Movement are better prepared to confront vigorously the serious problems we face. The development is the business of everyone. As it is recognized that true development is a company elicited from within, willed and conducted together with all the living forces of the nation, it must incorporate all the dimensions of life and all the energies of the community so that each professional category or each social group is called to participate in the general effort and to share the fruits. Thus the Rwandan culture that must shape the new Rwandan forge his conscience, must be safeguarded and enhanced to better fulfill its role of improving the quality of life of the entire population.

Militants of M.R.N.D.,

Rwanda, our country knows and will continue to experience serious problems. In our Third Development and previous maps Plan, we have demonstrated the absolute need to slow down (population explosion, intensified agriculture, fight vigorously against erosion and reforestation do to try to give back to our soil fertility of yesteryear lost to the ages. our natural resources are too low and our export mainly agricultural products are subject to uncontrollable fluctuations in world prices and global inflation. the result is that export revenues we derive are insufficient for normal functioning of our economy.

Rwanda is a landlocked country. Its distance from the ports of Mombasa and Dar es Salaam places our country at a disadvantage. The transport costs of our goods for import and export are constantly increasing; traffic regularity is not ensured all, causing a difficult inventory management.

Faithful to the principles of peaceful coexistence between nations and open to all countries and peace-loving. goodwill, Rwanda will continue to promote good neighborly relations and to strengthen our international cooperation. We live in an interdependent world where access to resources must be accessible to all inhabitants of this land and where selfishness must give way to love of neighbor.

Militants of M.R.N.D.,

The options in the Second Republic are known to you: Peace, National Unity for Development. He was asked each inhabitant of Rwanda, Rwanda as abroad, to ensure the peace, the security of each and property. A special effort was required specialized services for the protection, conservation of this peace: security services, judiciary system, prefectural governments and municipal responsible for communal areas and cells, without ignoring that the safeguard this peace is the work of each of us. We still urgently appeal to the security services, officials of justice, the authorities of the prefectures, communes, sectors and cells, and to the entire population, to redouble their efforts to flush out criminals and proportionately punish their reprehensible conduct.

The peace that we continue to insist we still want more effective during the election period ahead. We have never hidden our repulsion for hatred, divisions, intrigues. These habits and practices must no longer appear: in the solicitation of the votes of our constituents. Each candidate in the next elections care to avoid demagogy, while bashing autrui- and any division of his constituents, conduct that would also be of bad quality, since the candidates will present themselves under the banner of our National Revolutionary Movement for Development . The manifesto urges us to "banish the Rwandan mentality survivals of feudalism: caste, court intrigues and hampers national development." The same movement reminds us that his "Officers must be citizens enjoying the confidence of the people, aware and convinced of the urgent need which forced us to choose the path we have set." So obey the instructions we give the fourth ordinary congress of the Movement and those responsible for the organization of presidential and legislative elections.

In my speech of 1 July 1982, I informed the nation of my decision to see the elections take place in the same time as the presidential elections, this in accordance with the constitution and in order to match the two magistrates. It will be necessary to clarify some of the problems, including that of the number of MPs. Are we going to keep the same number, in which case the number of voters, 35,000 per member, must change. We keep the number of 35,000 voters per member, in which case the number of members will be increased substantially. The principle of adequate representation of the people in the National Development Council must be maintained and must seek efficiency. You know that the population growth rate in our country is higher than the economic growth rate which causes us also serious problems regarding the satisfaction of the basic needs of the population.

If we accept the principle of a proportional increase of Deputies against the increase in population, we might arrive at a situation where the country would not be able to provide them with suitable resources. It is therefore essential distract our efforts in increasing production, improving and strengthening the economic and financial situation of the country. Rwanda, poor, landlocked, is among the countries most exposed to the ups and downs of the global economy characterized by persistent recession and galloping inflation. The desire to adapt our institutions to the economic realities of the country should dictate caution and realism.

Militants of M.R.N.D.,

The peace we want to be permanently cemented and sustained by the unity between all the son and daughters of the country, real unity between ethnic groups, living unity between militants and supporters of the MRND, efficient unity among families, unity finally, among all the actors of the National development. We will then, again, in the line of our movement who condemned (irrevocably any tendency to separatist or racist, and a fortiori any attitude of superiority of one race, ethnic group, a family of a region, a religious denomination over others. "

Assured of the competition of these two pillars of our actions which are peace and national unity, we must continue the coalition of all forces of the nation against underdevelopment both mentally and socio-economic .

I like to emphasize a particular point today for training for development. This is the information of our people. From August 1, 1973, I said that "the people must be regularly informed of any plans regarding the into participating in its realization knowingly" and that "the elements of sound information must be drawn from the source of our culture. " And in this aspect so important what information Development, I insisted, repeatedly, on the prominent role to be played by the journalist, the one to inform to form, expressing themselves freely guaranteed our Constitution, our movement and my own statements. And freedom of opinion, activists, it exists. Who wants to see the shows. And, since the advent of the Second Republic, we promised the people of Rwanda to guarantee not only freedom of opinion, but also the fundamental freedoms as recognized internationally, but that freedom of opinion and expression must be limited by respect for established laws, order and public tranquility. African journalists gathered in Kigali, I spoke in these terms, 21 June 1980: "For us, we want the journalist to be integrated into the development, he knows to balance the fact -d ' avoid spy a false leaders to be able to publish and being afraid to inform the leaders of the guide, and tell them the aspirations of the people. "

I recalled it to reaffirm the Government's commitment to various public freedoms such as acknowledge our Constitution, our Movement and the various texts that result. I would say the Government will again see our journalists and our mass media use this freedom in a formative and constructive language. The sensational has had its day. These news organizations, training and guidance of the public are invited to check seriously the facts that bear their writings to expose objectively and with respect for people, if they are concerned. They must remember that we do not ignore the problems and challenges facing our country, but the flattening of these faces our limited means. And we'd like one who raises an issue, whether in the press, be it in a meeting, we indicated that the croft reasonable solution. Let us finally remember that the solutions do not lie solely on the side of the leaders, but in coalition efforts of leaders and led. I ask different newspapers, and especially their leaders, not to give in so easily to the temptation of irresponsible defamation, oversimplification and assertions, often at the expense of honest people who have limitations facing anyone of us.

I also invite all leaders not to expect the intervention of the press to fulfill their duties and not to avoid the truth, insofar as it is such, that contain the views expressed.

Militants of M.R.N.D.,

As mentioned above, the end of the current year will be done for the presidential and legislative elections.

We want now to give voters and the entire population the opportunity to reflect on the meaning of these elections and the value of their future representatives. The election means an option. Must we repeat our exhortations of 26 October 1981, "we recommend to the people a choice conscious and responsible. We expect these elected representatives whether the development of developers and not the instruments of power struggles or special interests. Thus a real responsible democracy will take root in our country. "

Respecting Article 40 of our Constitution and Article 14 of the Statutes of the Movement, in which the President of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development is the only candidate for the Presidency of the Republic, this National Ordinary Congress will elect the President of MRND who shall be entitled to seek the votes of the people to preside over the nation for a period of five years. Whatever you choose to be present at the same time that future voters deputies candidates at the National Development Council. These elections take place in accordance with guidelines that you will give during the 4th Ordinary Congress of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, which will amend or supplement those from the Third Congress to correct any deficiencies that may have emerged since.

According to Article 14 of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development statutes, the Central Committee will present to this Honorable Congress candidate I am that candidate. No other ambition than to continue to employ all my physical and moral strength to lead the people of Rwanda to a wellness still greater in the life of unity, concord and dialogue, as I said the nation in my keynote speech of 8 January 1979.

My program, you know, it is that of our Movement, which brings you all as well as those that you represent in this Congress. This is the one I proposed to the nation from the Five in July 1973, which I detailed in subsequent communications and synthesized in the National Revolutionary Movement for Development Manifesto of the 3rd Congress amended and adopted. This program is contained in the three words that are valuable to our action: PEACE, UNITY, DEVELOPMENT.

The troubles, I preferred peace. Instead of the plot, I proposed action. Fratricidal struggles, I advocated national unity.

Insured tranquility that you have always supported, I quickly set out to pursue the completion of our triptych by the revival of national development. The contact with the people was taken at various levels to explain the future of the people is first in his own hands. It was recalled in this population as labor, intellectual and manual, was essential to break the underdevelopment of the country, as best understood UMUGANDA, better planned and better executed was a great contribution. I met both farmers, employees and foreign friends that complement our own efforts. Development plans have been updated and rehabilitated. Our institutions and administrative and judicial organizations were presented in tune with the country's development in a climate of democracy which we wanted healthy and mostly responsible. The productive apparatus has been invigorated, supported by slogans that we launch every year without losing previous views. Our organs of information have been mobilized to serve as transmission belt for directed and leaders wills.

So this program intends to follow with Your competition who has never failed him. Your candidate who, if you promised to use all his physical and moral strength, did you not promised to do alone.

He likes to thank to you all his aides in the Central Committee and the Government, Members of the National Development Council, despite the short period of its existence, have shown a maturity already acquired by the Rwandan people and his elect.

The Executive and the dependent services if attéleront further animate the national development under the watchful eye of members of the National Council of Development whose role is to develop laws that have and will have the sole objective the integral development of our country and the development of our people.

The reformed judiciary meanwhile assume its responsibilities as a real power independent of the other two. He will remember that justice for the people, the very people that there are nearly twenty four years revolted demanding justice in particular was long denied him.

We will also have to renew certain other organs of the Administration and of our Movement to base our action on the elements worthy of the people. We also happen to sanitize various public services away with regret of the elements that will prove unable to meet the demands of the people to ensure its development in peace and unity.

We founded on the common lot of hope for the basic development of our country. We will continue to do so. The problems and difficulties of these administrative entities are known to us. We did what we could to solve them and we will continue. We urgently appeal to those same towns, their authorities as to their nationals and their residents so that they know are the first concerned by the progress of their joint. The sacred principle of our movement to rely primarily on its own efforts applies at all levels, from the individual to the family, this whole country, passing through the town, the basic unit of development.

I specially invited young people not to abandon their towns, the ones who are able to serve them. Our policy was always to ask everyone to work for the production and everyone must remain where it actually happened. Without production, live what we? We want these arms are used to develop the town and create jobs that will make them live. Let the young men and young girls are the support of the authors of their days. Cities already have their problems, your brothers and sisters who live in suffering. It is unitilede them worse by unnecessary and often harmful stays. All the forces of the nation must unite to overcome all the difficulties wherever they are in the city and in the country.

Last year we celebrated the benefits of the first revolution that has made the country its independence. We celebrate almost ten years of its second revolution in his unique moral purpose has given oxygen to our beloved Rwanda. We are determined to maintain our revolution continues, because "that forgets the past is condemned to relive it."

With our strong determination, under the banner of our movement, we put the odds on our side and we are confident of victory. This victory will depend on the commitment of each of us, our assurance step in the long march towards development. I hope that this insurance is further illuminated by the conclusions drawn from our discussions.

And it is on these wishes I declare open the work of the Fourth Ordinary National Congress of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development.

