Heads of State and Government and Very Dear Brothers, Citizen President and Dear Brother, Comrade President and Dear Brother, Heads of Delegation, Members of the Diplomatic and Consular Corps, distinguished guests. Ladies and gentlemen, Militants MR ND

In speaking at the moment, I would like to welcome our illustrious hosts who came to join us to celebrate in joy and gladness Tenth anniversary of the Republic and even thank them from my heart to have kindly accepted our invitation. I make these vows on my behalf and on behalf of all Rwandans gathered at the National Revolutionary Movement for Development. Your presence on this hospitable land of Rwanda honors us to the highest point and we will spare no effort to ensure your stay is as comfortable as possible.

Your personal participation in the events of that day still marks once a step forward in strengthening the historical ties of friendship, solidarity and cooperation between our peoples. The Rwandan people, proud of your presence, would by the same occasion to say how he highly appreciates your efforts to consolidate the gains of the independence of your country.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

On the anniversary of July 5, here we are again gathered to commemorate glad, the three most important events of the contemporary history of our country. As you all know, this is the 21th anniversary of our national independence anniversary 1Oème the advent of the Republic and even the 8th anniversary of the creation of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development.

It is exactly one year before the same forum, I was doing you review the 20 years of Independence of our country. Today, to avoid repetition, my comments will be limited to give you a clear picture of the life of the same Republic. I am pleased that the famous 10 years Rwandan people of peace and unity found after the troubled period before July 5, 1973. There is no need to dwell on the circumstances that preceded the advent Even the Republic. But let me remind them briefly.

For the 1959 revolution, the people of Rwanda regained its right to dignity, justice, freedom and democracy, as many inalienable rights which it had long been deprived by the feudal colonial regime.

During next few years, the political authorities have managed to safeguard the achievements of the Revolution; they have worked hard to put our country on the path of democracy and progress under difficult circumstances. This is the place to recall the role played by the late Gregory Kayibanda. The people of Rwanda, because of its many merits, erased all the criticisms that have been made to him in the suite.

Proud of the achievements of the Revolution, the Rwandan people could consciously prepare Independence acquired on 1 July 1962 and whose 21th anniversary we celebrate. But an unfortunate political situation was quickly threatened to erase the gains of our revolution.

The first half of 1973 was marked by endemic disorders of movement characterized by infighting, destruction and looting of property, the accentuation of regional and ethnic rivalries. These disorders are accompanied by a decline in economic situation, dominated the political favoritism in the distribution of funds, goods and services. The political scene was characterized by an exaggerated regionalism, monopolized by a handful of corrupt politicians, unscrupulous. They were concerned to circumvent the state's Chief preventing it to listen to other ideas that do not emanate from their caste. A climate of hatred, intrigue and division was created, developed and maintained by those politicians who sought their own interests.

Across the country, the disorder took place the law was ignored, the hatred and the prevailing insecurity.

The Rwandan Armed Forces, the guarantors of national security, threatened with dislocation, took their responsibilities. On the night of 4 to 5 July 1973, the chaos, irresponsibility and threats, they led this saving action. They said NO vigorously to this handful of people who wanted to divide the Sons and Daughters of the country. With this moral revolution, we introduced the eleventh Republic. Its aim, to restore peace, unity, the National Concord to put the country on the path of progress.

Activists, Activists MRND

In the speech - Program 1 August 1973, I defined the basic principles that would guide the authorities of the Republic eleventh. These principles constitute the benchmarks for balancing of our action. In this speech, I emphasized .that our first duty is to safeguard the public tranquility as at the borders and within the Republic; tranquility to guarantee the safety of people and property. The main objective was and remains the search for peace and unity among all citizens. To get there, we have relied on your determination to work for a lasting peace. The Rwandan around every people has contributed to the restoration of this new era, era of Peace, Unity and National Concord. The Armed Forces have benefited from your competition. Be proud.

On the Socio-Economic Plan, the problems were more complex. I said that security can indeed be total if people continue to eat poorly, to stay bad to dress poorly and vegetate in ignorance and under-employment. I told you that the coup of 5 July could work miracles socio-economically, because governments change but the problems of our country remain linked to the poverty of our soil and our basement at the population explosion and isolation. We have all worked hard to find solutions to these problems, we must welcome the results, even if the road ahead is still long.

National were pushed to an investment effort. We have said that we are not of those who are jealous of the individual efforts of Rwanda. Our principle has always been that Rwanda will be developed by his own children. The stranger will come only when he realizes that everything is peaceful and that its investments promise the most benefits.

For me, this principle is fundamental and that is why it was requested that the credit agencies are restructured to be able to strengthen the investment capacity of local communities and families.

In terms of external relations, our objective was the improvement of friendly relations with countries that help the development of our country. Our constant concern was to safeguard international peace in the framework of human solidarity.

In the same speech, I also stressed that education should hold our attention. I then indicated that primary education must be designed not to lead to secondary education but to give to the nation of responsible citizens, able to participate meaningfully in the overall development effort.

It proved indeed necessary to reform the system of our education to prepare more to integrate into the rural areas.

Activists, Activists MRND

To get out of the state of underdevelopment, the Second Republic has paid special attention to socio-economic activities. The state is not able to finance all of them, it seemed necessary to appeal to all forces in the country by channeling Umuganda, established in 1974. The Umuganda remains the cornerstone of our policy for the betterment of everyone requires effective mobilization of all our resources and energies. According to the principle of our movement, Rwanda can only be built by the sum of the efforts of his own daughters and son.

I have repeatedly reminded the paramount place to return to community development work. Our progress will indeed primarily the result of our own sacrifices. Each responsible in any level it is, must be convinced of its role as facilitator of progress and the obligation to further promote the participation of all the Umuganda.

These community development work is currently causing many achievements that our country can be proud. These achievements focus on land development, cultivation fields models, reforestation, maintenance of coffee plantations, the supply and maintenance of drinking water sources, construction and maintenance of roads, of schools and administrative and social buildings. Some believed the return of the chores of the feudal colonial era. The orientation and the results were the best denial. Umuganda is well planned and will remain an instrument useful for Development countries socioeconomic. It demonstrates the importance we attach to the work mostly manual as a value and as a primary source of our prosperity.

Activists, Activists MRND

The climax of the mobilization of the Rwandan people to get out of underdevelopment was realized with the creation of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development which we celebrate the 8th anniversary today.

We expected this movement "the final liquidation of consequences of hatred and division created by the history of our country among the three ethnic groups and regions. We expected the banishment of the Rwandan mentality of feudal survivals: caste, court intrigues and hampers national development. " We can rejoice in this that harmony reigns between Rwandan, based on the principles of mutual respect. A few individuals, force-fed power conferred their positions they occupied in the administrative hierarchy, drunken fruit of this policy of peace and devoured by immoderate ambitions, attempted a return to politics based on ethnic opposition and regional. The plans of these criminals were discovered, justice was seized and spoke freely and independently.

In order to fully realize the mobilization of all Rwandans, the statutes of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development provide different organs, central, prefectural and basic organs.

As we celebrate the 8th anniversary of the creation of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, we can congratulate ourselves on the functioning of these organs, characterized by a spirit of ongoing dialogue between leaders and led.

Since the establishment of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, four National Congresses were held and resolutions emanating form the action of drivers as son of the other bodies of the Movement that the Government itself.

I would include the results of the Fourth Congress of the MRND who proved the political maturity reached by the Rwandan people. I would again like to thank all the Militants of the MRND who, through their worthy representatives to 4th Congress renewed again me all the confidence continues to show me my people.

I would like for my part, assure you of my firm determination to work for the welfare of the population in this climate of peace and national concord found.

Rwandans,

The National Revolutionary Movement for Development has contributed greatly to the restoration of peace and the National Concord, indispensable conditions for ensuring our country out of underdevelopment. Guided by its guidelines, the Rwandan people saw gradually make the return to democratic institutions, promise contained in the first political statements that followed the action of 5 July 1973.

The stages of the restoration of democracy, we have experienced together. The constitutional referendum, presidential elections in December 1978, the re-election of Communal Councilors in January 1980, the establishment of the MRND organs Communal and Prefectural level in March 1980, and finally the election of Deputies to C.N.D. 28 December 1981. This last step was safely crossed because once again, the National Revolutionary Movement for Development took to his account the organization of elections. You already know the same operations are also planned this year. We solemnly call on Militants and activists of our movement to show the same discipline and the same determination to safeguard the achievements of the moral revolution of 5 July 1973.

These achievements are limited obviously not in the political field, they both concern the production sector. In order to mobilize the population to increase this production and thereby increase the chances of well-being of all citizens, it seemed necessary to annually set a reference topic. Thus 1974 was dedicated to agricultural work. I told you at the dawn of this new year, 1974, that "Rwanda's economy still take several years for our agricultural products. It was necessary therefore that the Rwandan people be sensitized on the need to increase our crops, both food products as exports.

The themes for the following years would witness the constant concern for the well-being of the population by increasing production (1975), the home improvement (1977), promotion of livestock (1978), the education reform (1979), soil conservation (1980), research and proper use of water resources (1981), the anti-erosion (1982) and afforestation (1983) .

I must stress again the permanent nature of these themes. They must remain slogans and reference points in the struggle for food self-sufficiency and improving the living conditions of all citizens.

Activists, Activists MRND

If today we celebrate the tenth anniversary of the Second Republic, we can not forget that it is thanks to the intervention of your army as that one was born. The High Command of your National Guard then you specified the Five in July 1973: "The National Guard, your own children - can never tolerate the country to be cut into pieces. She can not condone hatred and regional factions. She refuses the regional limitations recommended by the enemies of National Unity. The action of your army was and is intended to save this national unity, and to keep the country on track. "

Your Armed Forces took this saving decision. But they soon decided to involve all forces of the country to the action of national recovery.

The Armed Forces have also undertaken to provide training calendar as a professional in a part of the school youth. In doing so, they allow these young people to escape idleness, source of vagrancy and crime. My determination is to maintain the peace, unity and cohesion from all components of society: ethnic elements, regional, religious, military, civilians, peasants, officials, rich, poor, directed and leaders.

It never happened to me to spare someone because he was our ranks, on the contrary. To understand, I have always attached the invitation to perpetual renewal effort, self-transcendence, so that everyone rises unabated up to its mission. The weapon is demanding. I always wanted as men who have chosen to serve the country in the Armed Forces, feel integrated within the company for the entire development of our people. This is what we teach the manifesto of our Movement. "The armed forces, long held outside the social and economic activities of the nation, are now integrated with the executives of the general mobilization of the masses. All patriotic and progressive forces must now feel more involved. " But their greatest contribution to development remains the defense of this country and its his inner tranquility. The Republic could she exist without the Rwandan Army. That ignores the attacks on Rwanda was subject to the first years of social revolution and independence? It is still the country that it had to resort to stop the disturbances and riots that broke out around the beginning of 1973. It is she who was obliged, organized force to restore peace in the hearts and end ethnic and regional divisions. And always your Armed Forces, for his body of Gendarmerie neutralize those who would, through subversion and violence, challenge happy achievements of our moral revolution July seventy-three.

Our countries have gained independence often in difficult conditions and were forced to invest a significant portion of their resources in military spending to ensure an appropriate defense capability. Although Rwanda has on the effectiveness of the Armed Forces to ensure the security of its borders and the inside of the country and to take care of other tasks at their extent, Rwanda's military expenses as a percentage GDP fell between the beginning and the end of 1970 from 3 to 1.5%. This shows once again the constant concern of the Government of the Republic even improve the welfare of all its people. Spending our scarce resources must be harmoniously divided between all the vital sectors of national life. On the other hand, the defense of the country is not the monopoly of the military. She calls the participation of every citizen who in turn must feel the conditions that help for a full development.

Militants of the MRND,

Since the independence of our country, the Government has always focused on the development of the family and especially of women. Women have always played a highly important role in the development of the country. Our tradition integrates completely into socio-economic life.

This is why the state must ensure that the woman is better equipped to be able to face all the problems that may slow its momentum in the path of progress. It is through education at all levels that these chains will be broken, thus fulfilling the wishes of our Movement Manifesto which states that "the Movement supports the emancipation of women in respect of family ties; the development of his personality must be strengthened through access to education, professional responsibility, social, economic and political. "

At present, we can congratulate ourselves that the prominent role of Rwandan women in our development effort is fully recognized, the increasing number of girls and women in all sectors is witness. This growth will only grow with time and we place much hope in them, because pooling their energies and skills, will undoubtedly contribute to the harmonious development of our country.

This hope also affects youth. According to the 1978 census, the working-age workforce represent 63.3% of the total population. We know just as well a small proportion of young people can now benefit from training in high school, college and university.

Faced with this reality, we, from the speech - Program 1 August 1973, asked the Ministry of Education to ensure the cooperation of all the studies, involving representatives of the various sectors concerned to find a better orientation of Education in Rwanda. " Primary Education must therefore be "designed not to lead to secondary school, but to give the nation responsible citizens, able to participate meaningfully in the development effort." In this context, "the Primary Education program should be designed primarily to enable the youth to get out of this cycle well equipped to face life, to participate effectively in national development."

In order to make these decisions, the year 1979 was declared Year of Education. The Government, after organizing a public debate, through the Prefectural Congress, as it is our habit to problems of national importance, adopted the broad guidelines of the reform of Education and approved the implementing measures this reform both at the level primary and post-primary and secondary. These implementing measures are a program to be continually thought, "to ensure that it is understood by the very people who must execute and to proceed in a timely manner, the adjustments considered necessary ". Among those responsible for implementing this program, teachers are placed first. This category needs support but also control, in order to "remove incompetent and lazy, but also encourage goodwill.

It was also necessary that the implementing measures of school reform are legalized. To do this, the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education has prepared a bill amending the Act of 27 August 1966 on National Education and a draft law on the status of agents of the Public Education first and second levels. These two texts, having been submitted to the prefectural congress examination, were examined by the National Revolutionary Movement of the Central Committee for Development. After their adoption, it is conceivable that this great step taken will be a stimulus for those who have the responsibility to shape the future of the country and assured of dedicated and competent staff.

The construction of primary schools as part of Umuganda contributed in some way to increase the number of students. Unfortunately, although significant efforts have been made, the number of children moving from primary to post-primary and secondary education remains low. The same situation is observed at the University. The lack of suitable premises, teaching materials and qualified personnel is a serious handicap to the development of our education system.

But we can rejoice in the results achieved in this area, despite limited our means, even if the road ahead is still long and difficult.

We must therefore prepare ourselves seriously, all our energies and our resources so that we can ensure this youth a better future.

In terms of school youth, it is worth recalling the objective set in the Ministry of Youth and Sports on 01.08.1973. "This department should address civic education of youth and participation in working life, life that, for most, is carried in the rural areas. This is why a basic agricultural training, craft and on the cooperative movement must be given. "

Since the advent of the same Republic, the Ministry of Youth and Sports has ensured ensure the supervision of school youth by forming municipal supervisors and supporting training centers and groups of young people. So this youth could flourish and gain a level of education needed for the rational exploitation of its environment. This action should be continued for a better integration of school youth and those who will come from CERAI in their natural living. This way it will be possible to stem the rural increasingly pronounced exodus of thousands of young people to urban centers where they do not slow to be confused and to indulge afterwards vagrancy and delinquency.

Evoking delinquency in the different forms, I return to security problems. We are witnessing in fact a periodic rise in banditry. It is therefore imperative to take care of this issue both in the strict application of repressive measures than of implementing preventive measures.

The Government for its part sought to restructure the judicial system and reform became effective in April 1982. However, we are aware of the need to raise awareness among judges in insisting that the aim of all justice is the protection of honest citizens and guarantee of peace.

Moreover, the government continued the policy of bringing the public and the administrative authorities by the proliferation of sub-prefectures. I remind here that the permanent objective is to ensure better supervision of the population in development activities. Currently, 22 sub-prefectures were created, distributed in all prefectures.

Militants of the MRND,

Since the birth of the Republic Even the food problem has always been one of our main concerns, because the survival of the population depends on it.

The food self-sufficiency, the ultimate goal of our various Economic and Social Development Plans, is crucially urgent for our country. The well-being and dignity of all Rwandans and the development and security of our nation require.

To solve forever the problem of agriculture and food production imbalance, the precondition is the demonstration of a strong political will to devote a much greater volume of resources to agriculture, to carry out a critical reorientation production systems, to implement policies that will encourage farmers to achieve the highest level of productivity, and establish effective mechanisms and organizations for the formulation, implementation and monitoring of programs required.

That's what we tried to do during the 10 years that have passed. In my speech - 1.8.1973 program, I asked to seek greater productivity with the introduction of modern farming methods, erosion control measures, rational use of fertilizers and the implementation of a rural development Plan.

The slogans I launched since 1974 and the institutionalization of Umuganda demonstrate the political will to increase agricultural and food production.

The economy of our country is mainly based on agriculture. Unfortunately it is subject to several constraints related to the demographic situation of the country, the scarcity of arable land, poverty of our soils and lack of agricultural inputs.

Rapid population growth and structural transformation that accompany took several important implications and complex food production. The growth rate of the population was approximately equal to the rate of agricultural and food production. Population growth and led to the development of areas with marginal agricultural potential. This balance we can congratulate ourselves, but delicate balance needs to be strengthened, increasing agricultural production not by the development of new lands but by increasing yields per unit area.

The destruction of the forest and savanna to satisfy the growing demand for fuel and increase arable land, degeneration of cultural practices (disappearance of fallow, overgrazing), excessive rains, often torrential fall on a strong rugged resulted to the depletion of our soils and thus the decrease in production.

The lack of agricultural inputs linked to poverty campaigns only reduce the level of food production.

Faced with all these problems, we have the next day the same Republic, decided to focus on integrated rural development programs in order to increase agricultural and food production, increase revenue and finally raise the peasant masses the standard of living of the populations concerned. Thus, the following projects have emerged: The Office for Pastoral and Agricultural Valuation Mutara (OVAPAM), Bugesera project - Gisaka - Migongo (BGM), the Café Food Project and Food Crops on Lake Kivu, integrated rural project of the Zaire-Nile, agricultural intensification in Gikongoro, the agricultural intensification in Butare Prefecture and Byumba, the development project of Commons Rutare - Giti and Kibungo 11 Kigali East project, and so on.

If we produce more, we must protect our soil, improving it to increase its productivity. Thus the erosion control, abandoned during the 1st Republic, regained its vitality. Terraces established during the supervision period were reconstituted, anti-erosion ditches were dug and were strengthened by the fixing herbs. Through our reforestation effort materialized through the institutionalization of the National Tree Day, and the proclamation of the Year of the Tree, the summits formerly barren hills and the highly marginal soils gradually have a vegetative cover to both better water infiltration into the soil and increased energy opportunities for households. Thus, in addition to major projects such as the Forestry Pilot Project in Kibuye, the project Agro-Silvo-Pastoral Gishwati Butare-Kigali, several thousand hectares were planted as part of the Umuganda. Thousands of avocados and other fruit trees have been planted to improve the diet of Rwandans. The soil thus protected against aggression from rain can receive desired improvements such as the use of manure and selected seeds in order to give more yield.

Also in order to improve our diet, a special effort was made in breeding. The demographic situation of our country and the need for protein balance in our diets require us to cut short our traditional farming extensive type and engage resolutely in the path of intensification and its association with agriculture. Even if we could not record outstanding results in breeding cattle, necessary to rejoice performance gained in the small livestock from distribution centers Kabuye Ruhengeri Bu-Packaging Cyangugu. This effort has been reflected from development projects becoming scattering nuclei locally.

Since the advent of the eleventh Republic, we have focused on food production while maintaining the necessary balance between it and the cultures of exports, while generating more than 80% of our currency, n ' occupy only 4% of the total cultivable area.

For the agricultural and food production progresses, it must be based on a strong agricultural research and adapted to our local conditions and on the dissemination of its results. Admittedly unfortunately that agricultural research, particularly in regard to staple food crops, have not yet yielded tangible results. The country remained away from work being done in research stations. But there is hope that with the seminar on agricultural research held in Kigali last February, it will be oriented so that it can lead to increased food productivity.

If we deplore the lack of progress in the field of agricultural research, we still rejoice in the Government's efforts in improving extension services and training of managerial staff. Thus, since the advent of the same Republic, Faculty of Agronomy opened to Rwandan students and several agricultural and veterinary schools are already operational including the Agricultural School for Girls Nyagahanga, School agro-Forestry of Nyamishaba and soon the Agri-Veterinary School Busogo. But this agricultural extension requires even more effort.

In addition to the negative impacts of climate and soil conditions, food losses after harvest still constitute a major obstacle to efforts to reduce the growing food deficit.

Political mismatched pricing and marketing can also be an obstacle to the development of agriculture and food sector. To remedy these problems, the Government has set up a food products storage system (GRENARWA) and created the Office of Recovery and Vivriers Products of Marketing and Livestock (OPROVIA) whose storage capacity is currently 25,000 Tons. The results are not yet fully satisfactory, but we believe and hope that with the directives for the necessary improvements, Rwandan farmers can be better protected against the trader and speculator have a profitable price the incentive to work harder.

Rwandans,

In the next twenty years the population of Rwanda will double. It is therefore necessary that we prepare ourselves to ensure the population with adequate food. We have defined our food strategy that gives priority to farmers and food production including the development of the productive potential is key to solving the food crisis looming. The implementation of policies to increase production involves deep internal transformations and continuous effort over a long period. It also requires the conversion of mentalities internationally for strengthening interventions in food production locally. We must banish all forms of technological dependence in this area. As it should be banned at the same time any policy that would tend to accustom our population to a diet that will not happen. A well-designed food strategy must promote endogenous development of the means of production. Domestically considerable efforts are required. The mobilization of all economic agents and all the energy is indispensable. We will ensure that the food strategy policies affect all the forces of the Rwandan nation and take into account the situation and aspirations of the whole entire population. Thus these policies have helped to strengthen national solidarity and to avert the danger of the progressive disarticulation of cities and the countryside.

Activists, and activists of the MRND,

I have long insisted on food and agricultural issues. This is no real development can only emerge if these problems are not controlled. The National Revolutionary Movement for Development wants every citizen of Rwanda enjoys the best conditions to be useful to society. But this ability can only be valued if the organization does not have enough vitality for lack of adequate food.

The human development is central to our concerns. Since the advent of the same Republic, the Government has developed programs to cultivate in the Rwandan entrepreneurship and innovation, allowing it to participate in the creation of necessary conditions for improving its standard of living and well-being of his family. The animation and literacy are essential tools to better knowledge of responsibilities and a better use of our resources to grow for the benefit of the community.

Therefore educate and train the masses is a duty of social and cultural justice. The Community Centers Development and Continuing Education (CCDF) have been created as to strengthen the capacity of people to collectively take charge of its own development and to promote and disseminate the techniques to improve living conditions all and accelerate social progress and cultural development. In others, major efforts are still needed. But there held that by raising awareness of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development and thoughtful actions of the Government, the people took over his own destiny. People eat better although still insufficiently especially qualitatively, dress appropriately, continuously improve their dwelling, cultivate the desire to increase their knowledge. The concern of the Government of the Second Republic has always been searching for all possible means to make available to the farmer to arm in open war against underdevelopment. We know we do not have sufficient resources. Fate has willed it so. But we have against the head and arms. Using them wisely we can take a step every day in the way of progress.

According to the manifesto of our Movement, investment in health matters was favored because it improves the health of the population, an important factor of our development effort. Several new hospitals have been built and old were restored and enlarged. Health centers are gradually replacing old clinics. The mass of Medicine was always favored. The training of qualified personnel was continued in order to meet the needs of the population. But in this as in all other sectors of national life, our limited resources do not allow us to give all Rwandans all the care they wish they. This is why we have always insisted on preventive medicine rather than curative medicine. A balanced diet and an individual and collective hygiene can ellesseules to eliminate more than half of diseases in our country. Continuing education of the population will always be necessary.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

The philosophy behind our economic development policy is that of self-development, that is to say economic development, which builds on the forces of the country and the value of its own resources. This policy is dictated by the manifesto of our Movement which says that Rwanda will be built by the sum of the efforts of his own son and daughters and so establishes the principle of relying primarily on its forces. We consider economic independence as an essential foundation for real and true independence of our country.

If we insist on the principles on which our economic development policy is that it is only their light it is possible to measure the true value of the progress made since ten years. An ecologically sound, socially desirable and economically viable, so that's the criteria that we submit our assessment of progress.

The day after the moral revolution of 5 July 1973, it was our duty to print our economy a large enough growth rate to cause accumulation of capital essential to the continued construction of our country.

Taking as indicator the gross national product, which despite its conceptual shortcomings, remains a valid standard of comparison, we see that the period 1969-1974 was a period of slow growth. While the period 1974-1981 was characterized by relatively strong growth, that is to say, in real terms, GDP grew at a rate of over 5 percent per year, ranking Rwanda for this period among African countries that recorded high growth rates. This accelerated growth has had a very positive effect especially in terms of developing our infrastructure, on one of the significant increase of domestic production activities and the prominence of Rwandan commercial channels.

All this led to the birth and the gradual expansion of markets, shopping centers and trading centers. This ensures, in a growing way, the supply of our population in various necessities. This also leads to the emergence of a core of local entrepreneurs whose role in development can not be underestimated.

The extension of the road infrastructure and construction, through Umuganda motorable tracks in the countryside are another consequence of economic growth that is so visible to the one that followed our development for 10 years. These road infrastructure, the main ones: KIGALI - Rusumo, RUHEIMGERI - Gisenyi, Kigali - Butare - Akanyaru allow today to reach most areas of our country that were previously difficult to access.

This major effort, will peak in a few years when all the current projects are completed, allowing our country to have an excellent road infrastructure. These projects are: KIGALI axes - RUHENGE-R - Cyanika BUTARE - CYANGUGU and soon the road KAYONZA - KAGITUMBA.

The improvement and extension of airport infrastructure KANOMBE will only open up a very sensitive way our country.

This communications network not only promotes relations with all countries neighboring friends, the impulse of our foreign trade, but also accelerate the domestic trade, source of real progress. The accelerated growth of our economy also allowed the harmonious development of our capital through the combined efforts of the Government and of the urban population.

Real growth we have experienced is not only the result of external factors, as some would like to believe. We see especially his cause in the effort aware that the Government has provided to promote the conditions for the development of productive forces: a bold opening up policy, appropriate education to the conditions of our country, a policy of providing employment to workers and workers an income that allows cash crop for the farmer to have a guaranteed cash income, increased marketing of agricultural products which stimulates the production and allows to supply urban centers.

But some external factors can not be mentioned when it comes to explaining the progress made over the past decade. This is the contribution of aid and technical assistance to Rwanda attached by its partners in international cooperation.

The privileged relationship that Rwanda has been established with most countries engaged in international cooperation are greatly due to the fact that friends and international organizations countries trust in the efforts of the Government and people of Rwanda and appreciate the way we manage our economy . International assistance has helped us substantially reduce the gap between domestic savings the necessary investment volume, while technical assistance helped to overcome another of our handicaps, namely, the lack of specialized staff and to ensure a transfer of technology that we should be beneficial.

The real economic growth is not accompanied by glaring social inequalities. Income distribution has not worsened. We can be proud that this economic growth has not exacerbated wealth gaps between a minority monopolizing the bulk of resources and the majority of the population that sees its share shrink by the day, as is the case too often. Indeed, although we are aware that the vast majority of our people still live close to the poverty line, it must be recognized that the benefits of real growth over the past decade have distributed more equitably among us.

To appreciate the positive developments in real terms, GDP, it must assess the change in the composition of the value added by sector; we see that the share of industrial is three times higher today. While this does not mean that the production structure was fundamentally changed, it must be admitted that this trend reflects the constant concern of the Government to promote a self-centered industrialization and endogenous. This positive trend also reflects the significant acceleration of domestic investment growth rates and gross domestic savings.

The Manifesto of our dedicated Movement austerity as one of the fundamental virtues of the Rwandan people; it is one of moral values ​​underlying the Rwandan revolution. Taking into account also the requirement to achieve the objectives of the MRND, the Government it is consistent in its management of public property of the state. With this requirement, Rwanda has managed to avoid financing budget deficits. It was not always easy to resist these temptations that would have proved disastrous because by engaging in exorbitant spending and borrowing, we have already used our reserves, we know now impossible to control inflation and would have the insuperable difficulties for the repayment of our debts.

The rural sector can not as easily absorb a significant amount of labor, so the secondary and tertiary sectors to take over, so I mean the industry and handicraft production.

This has been done for 10 years in this emerging field is the best guarantee for a major push, but endogenous, our industrialization. We have accumulated a lot of experiences, we have put in place some of the necessary preconditions for the smooth promotion of Rwandan firms which rely on an essential part of our future economic progress. The well-designed control of our industrialization is an essential element for its success. This takes time and requires the establishment of a real coherent, appropriate training, the provision of logistical and material support, easy credit system, but effective. All this is well underway, and the recent creation of a chamber of commerce and industry will in turn contribute effectively to the advancement of the sector.

Also in the area of ​​job creation, it is the public sector that has been favored, without that we can talk for as much of a bloated civil service. Rather, it was to ensure that diplomas Rwandan find a job that allows them to gain experience and make themselves useful to society. With the implementation, patient but consistent,

of physical infrastructure especially in areas that have substantial ripple effects on activity in other sectors, a comprehensive reform of education and training with a view to better meet the socio-economic needs our country and the implementation of certain policies (credit, industrialization etc ...) it will be increasingly possible to ensure good jobs elsewhere in the public service, further reducing the pressure on the latter in terms of the labor market.

Recall, for its paramount importance that the most urgent priority of the Government was, is, and will, promoting Rwandan farmer for the purpose for which self-sufficiency all our forces were mobilized. It is worth recalling a number of measures and actions of the Government, among many others, and that denote its fundamental concern on the matter:

the focus on the identification and implementation of projects and regional programs with a goal of especially increasing the productivity of small farmers, the establishment of a rural credit system, with the creation of a Fund Guarantee to cover the risks incurred by credit institutions operating in rural areas. the creation and strengthening of OPROVIA in order to facilitate the marketing of food products and ensure a fair price to the producer, the substantial increase in the producer price of coffee, which is located immediately at the highest, and that in real terms, of all the African countries. This involves certain risks, of course, especially as global prices have fallen since, but the Government believes that the Rwandan farmer who produces most of the coffee on his small family farm should be assured of money coming in on which he can always count and allowing it to make it better, the focus on municipal development, ie provide the support of the State and foremost at towns called to take part more and more important in rural development by organizing, launching and carrying out local development projects. For this it was necessary to implement the Municipal Development Fund and endow the Commons an infrastructure that makes them able to play this role.

Although many achievements can be mentioned in this regard, needs constantly exceed the means at our disposal. It is a long term project and the Government will do everything possible to accelerate the development of our cities, which must become the true homes of our self development.

A constant concern has been to ensure a distribution as egalitarian as wide of essential products throughout the territory. Organized in co-op, TRAFIPRO who recently celebrated 25 years of existence has experienced over the past decade a great expansion. With the huge consumer benefit of practicing the same price in all parts of the country and not taking advantage of the shortage to increase its profits, TRAFIPRO is the main stabilizer of prices in Rwanda. His action can not be separated from the permanent concern of the Government to ensure that economic progress is distributed as homogeneously as possible so that all of us can benefit fully.

It is also of prime importance to the Government that all of our people to have access to essential tools, such as certain possibilities of credit and deposit. It is hoped in this greater context of our expansion Banques Populaires in our campaigns. This will enable a large part of our population to have access to this accumulation instrument to primarily serve the vast majority of our people. Let me emphasize again that the momentum of the Banque Populaire expansion be not cut. It is gratifying to see that other banks are beginning to decentralize their activities to become also instruments for the advancement of the greatest number. The action that we hope even more effective in the Rwanda Development Bank is also mentioned in this context.

Militants of the MRND,

One can imagine a national economy can build, operate without energy problems are resolved. Even the Republic initiated a comprehensive program to still further increase the availability of the country's energy resources. The interconnection of networks Ntaruka - RUSIZI I start up the plant MUKUNGWA have more than doubled the production of electricity. After completion of the average lines tensions Ruhengeri - Gisenyi and Kabarondo - Kibungo - ZAZA all prefectures will be supplied by the national grid. It should also be noted important rural electrification programs that have emerged in several regions. This significant effort must be continuous. A national energy strategy produced significant efforts in the field of research and studies undertaken in recent years by the relevant departments and BUNEP, will be finalized shortly. This strategy will help address, a coordinated and integrated manner, the concerns about energy supply of the country, given its enormous needs that grow each day.

We have seen how real economic growth, we have lived for 10 years, has brought us:

Militants of the MRND,

a significant increase in our food production which helped largely feed our population despite the rapid increase of the latter; a "rwandisation" important to our economy that sees several key sectors of Rwandan ensure more responsibilities which are those of ensuring the same destiny of our people, that is to say the mart riser.

These two benefits overall we need to add a significant recovery in macroeconomic management. And it is on this last point it must be said a few things.

While some achievements of the last 10 years we have cited were particularly tangible for our entire population, it is an area in which government action was decisive: the macro-economic management. His effort is less visible in a concrete way, but this action is a priority prerequisite for that real progress is the ultimate justification of our development policies can take place.

This is the overall management of some economic sectors that are the basis of our development. We like to emphasize that Rwanda is characterized by sound management of its resources, especially fiscal and monetary. Rwandans are sensitive to this assessment because it reflects what is our fundamental belief: we can do the most with what we have and make sure we all competitions for the foundation of our wealth accumulation that is as endogenous possible, it is the fruit of our own efforts and not the fictional illusion of some brilliant articles, but special. True independence of a people, the ultimate guarantor of its dignity is to depend ultimately on their own decisions. Therefore it is important to give our state a margin of financial and economic independence, in order to have sufficient financial availability not amputated by long-term commitments that undermine our freedom and linking hands to feet our future generations .

So our fiscal policy is characterized by a conservative approach and cautious. This approach inspires our whole attitude to Public Finance. I do not think we should finance our development by budget deficits that could not be wiped by the creation of money, cause inflation and bottlenecks. That is why the Government was able to record some annual budget surpluses, despite the sharp rise in spending, surpluses that were the equivalent of one percent of GDP on average during the period 1974 - 1980. During the same period, the tax burden (that is to say, the share of taxes in GDP) has increased significantly; it will be even more in the coming years to enable the State to increase its ordinary expenses many of which are focused on the development (salaries of extension agents ...) and its actual development expenditure, ie, is to say public investment. The austerity policy, a budget policy and balance of payments were realistic and balanced and will be the basis of good management of our economy.

Rwanda is very aware of the precarious balance between the material, financial and human country. That's why it was not to mortgage the future. This is the main reason why our debt is low; not only Rwanda has benefited from very liberal conditionalities attached to aid flows, but Rwanda has also avoided the trap of engaging in a policy of wasteful investments.

Another important parameter conditioning the evolution of our economy is managing our money and our reserves. If at the dawn of the Republic Even our reserves were hardly enough to cover one month of imports, our monetary foreign exchange reserves now cover the equivalent of about seven months of imports of goods and services . This was made possible by careful management of domestic demand, real economic growth resulting in the growth of money supply and the increase in aid flows.

Our currency is linked to the US dollar has appreciated sharply since about 2 years. The overall benefits of this situation for Rwanda are obvious, although one or two industries are suffering from reduced revenues. The Government is working with partners and external assistance in finding appropriate solutions and remedies for each diagnosis.

proposals of devaluing our currency were advanced us insistently. The Government, after analysis, does not believe in the miracles of this solution. In a country that lives only for imports and exports which some are quantitatively limited either by our weakness of production, or by an international quota policy, we can not help a certain skepticism when the benefits of a not well controlled devaluation operation. Especially as the prices of these exports are set unilaterally outside our possibilities of intervention.

That our friends understand our understanding and help us to think more deeply about this problem.

I have already said that international cooperation was another essential element in building our economic development. The latter has increased considerably in 1974- 1981 to form a proportion of 13 percent of GDP, whereas in the past (1969-1974) this proportion was only 2 percent. Rwanda has been careful treatment by our international partners. This cooperation was not only the fruit of great generosity of our friends partners, but this generosity was based both on the political stability of countries and the concern of public authorities to promote equality of economic opportunity each Rwandans.

International cooperation is essential for our country contribute to the development of socio-economic. It is based on the part of the partner countries on the fact that the Rwandan government faithfully applying the principles of our movement, truly works for the development of the country and takes the necessary steps for this purpose.

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

In foreign policy, the Second Republic has sought to pursue an active diplomacy, drawing on the fundamental ethical principles of international morality and a particular focus on creating a climate conducive to good neighborly relations and on the opening without reservation to all countries loving peace, freedom, equality and justice.

Since 5 July 1973, Rwanda has largely open to friendship and international cooperation, in order to restore his credit in the concert of nations and mobilizing the contributions required to support the national development effort .

We have multiplied, to the highest political level contacts and exchanges of visits with our friends and partners whose circle continues to expand in the international community.

The priority was returning naturally to promote more harmonious relations with neighboring countries, I must emphasize, have booked the best; welcome all initiatives and actions aimed at creating a climate of mutual trust, in order to take advantage of geographical, socio-cultural and historical common that must be as many hyphens between our respective peoples.

Along with this good neighbor policy, which, beyond the bilateral relations doubles the will and determination to promote strong regional and sub-regional, the Second Republic has sought to deepen and develop relations of friendship and cooperation in accordance with the foreign policy principles defined in the National Revolutionary Movement for Development Manifesto.

These relations have developed with a growing dynamism which has enabled Rwanda to become better known and appreciated internationally and mobilize active sympathy of increasingly numerous partners, as part of its development efforts.

On this happy occasion, it falls to me the honor and pleasant duty to solemnly proclaim our high appreciation for the development assistance which Rwanda is the lucky recipient and to reiterate the expression of our deep gratitude to all countries and agencies friends for the special attention they continue to testify on problems of development of our country.

By focusing on the principles of mutual respect among nations, peaceful coexistence, non-alignment positive, solidarity, cooperation and support to people whose inalienable and fundamental rights are still being violated, while during the last ten years, the Government of Rwanda has indicated a presence of more and more active on the international stage, by increasing contacts with bilateral and participating in forums where international relations issues are debated.

Much more than in the past, Rwanda is engaged in efforts to strengthen ethics resulting defined fundamental objectives including the United Nations Charter, the OAU and adopted as a rule of conduct by the Movement Non-Aligned countries.

The assessment that efforts in this spirit helped save, resulting in a finding of satisfaction that I wanted to speak on the occasion of this tenth anniversary we celebrate exalting the results achieved by the Rwandan people through the momentum of renewal, printed to the nation July 5, 1973 and urging to double determination to engage in the path of development.

In foreign policy, concretized this momentum by promoting and strengthening the growing relations of friendship and cooperation with the countries that share with Rwanda the ideals of peace, freedom, equality and justice.

It is in this context that I welcome again in your name, all the hosts of brands who wanted to enhance their presence the joy of the people of Rwanda thus manifesting her a sympathy which is a striking testimony as to our credit that country enjoys on the part of Governments and Organizations friends they represent.

I look forward to renew our feelings of sincere gratitude for the tribute that by their personal presence at such events, they made the links of friendship between Rwanda in their respective countries.

Militants of the MRND,

Lately some circles, relayed by some press, misinformed or ill-intentioned, like to poison the national and international opinion claiming that Rwanda fundamental freedoms are violated. We would, as for us, congratulating us that since the memorable date of 5 July 1973, the Rwandan people live in symbiosis with the Peace and National Unity found. The Peace and Unity for Development are, as you know, the foundation of our political action.

In the Manifesto and Statutes, we said that respect for the human person is the central concern of our Movement, the major traditional freedoms such as freedom of opinion, freedom of press, freedom of conscience, and religious freedom and their exercise are guaranteed. But we have also said that these freedoms must be exercised in the discipline to strengthen social order, consolidate peace and national unity and ensure the best individual performance in the constructive activities of the nation. Similarly. Our Constitution, democratically adopted by referendum devotes an important chapter to political freedoms and exercise.

It is these constitutional provisions and principles of our Movement that guide our work every day. We have already had the opportunity to show the importance we attach to these principles especially during the subversive activities of March-April 1980 that failed to delight the people peace and tranquility hard-won. Just recently, the people of Rwanda showed the world its commitment to respect for the human person when it hosted its territory, despite the constraints of all kinds, people from a neighboring country, deprived of everything.

With particular regard to stray from March-April 1980, the Government and people of Rwanda welcomed the fact that their trial was conducted under optimal conditions, that the magistrates who have had to deal with this matter acted in freedom and independence and a verdict that honors our country.

I wish to reaffirm that respect for the law is a constitutional guarantee to which we are attached. Also, the legal process has been scrupulously respected, all persons convicted serve their sentences.

Regarding freedom of expression and especially guarantees the newspapers enjoy to exercise this right, the Central Committee of the MRND and the Government come to stop measures to promote better collaboration. These measures were brought to the attention of all those responsible for the information media which will, in turn, to the knowledge of their employees. I wish all press men penetrate more of their duty to inform to educate and mobilize the people of Rwanda for its development. And I solemnly renew my commitment to devote all my strength and energy to enforce, by every Rwandan and Rwandan each for each inhabitant of this country, fundamental freedoms as defined by our Constitution and Manifesto of the MRND.

Activists, Activists MRND

I you have taken stock of the ten years since July 5th 1973. It is largely positive.

However no one better than Rwanda knows the suffered failures, deficiencies recorded, the handicaps that overwhelm, deadlines ahead.

But despite the international crisis that has hit the weaker economies, including that of Rwanda, we did well at the helm of our ship to prevent it from capsizing.

The ten years that have just passed are a source of pride. Pride for the return of peace, the unity that animates us, for the development to which every child in this country is now hard. Pride for our UMUGANDA which has given us hope in ourselves, for our movement, unifying and inspiring source of dialogue and consultation. Pride for our constant effort to sound management, to our circle of friends that always expands further. Source of legitimate pride that these ten years have passed. And source of hope for a better future for every Rwandan. The progress made and experienced was the fact of each militant and activist of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development and all our friends who help us. So be always so in the future.

