Excellencies, Members of the Diplomatic and Consular Corps, supporters, sympathizers of M.R.N.D, all you who live in our country,

I speak to you tonight to meet a nice custom that, on the occasion of Christmas and New year, we mutually welcome the safely be crossed, and we encourage each other to undertake new full of promise and hope.

I'm just reciprocate the same wishes for happiness, prosperity that each of you address the Rwandan people as a whole. That the year ahead brings much joy to the Heads of State that you have appointed to your citizens, to yourselves and your families. Everyone can achieve what he wishes for himself, his people and his family.

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

It is not without emotion that I address you all tonight to thank you most sincerely for your promise trusting me again, for five years, and the direction of our movement that unites us and all the destinies of our beloved country. I will do everything in my power not to disappoint the trust you placed in me.

Excellencies, Members of the Diplomatic and Consular Corps, Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

One thousand nine hundred eighty-three ending was for the country a year of important political events. We can take credit for the holding of the 4th Ordinary Congress of Our Movement whose resolutions have helped to reorient the country's policy in different areas, in compliance with our five year development plan.

We are also pleased to commemorate the anniversary of 1Oème (the Second Republic and eight years of the foundation of our Movement.

As I promised at the 4th Congress, I had the opportunity to visit, for the fifth time, all the prefectures, to reconnect with the realities of each of them, show them my sympathy and my support in their effort to build the country.

The past year was an opportunity for Rwanda to try again once the maturity of the people of Rwanda.

The M.R.N.D. teaches us that it is in peace that we ensure the development of our country, relying primarily on our own efforts that support our real foreign friends. I would not want this evening to try your patience as you réénumérant achievements that Rwanda has just reached the last twenty years and especially since more than ten years where we asked Rwandans to stop internal rifts, and s unite to work in the discipline, source of progress and happiness. We are proud of the people that we understood, followed and supported in the way we have set and improved with the help of all the National Revolutionary Movement activists and supporters Development.

Among the acquired peace is not the least. As we are seeing, sometimes powerless to explosive situations in many corners of the world, civil wars and colonial, latent or open, we can not but congratulate the people of Rwanda, which persists for tranquility, calm and availability for work. It is this peace that we defended and we will defend. This is immeasurable good that we wish for all those who, alas, do not. We will spare no effort on us to maintain security and tranquility of the country that both internal and external raise our voices calling for respect for freedoms of others around the world.

This tranquility has allowed the people of Rwanda to tackle the work, intellectual and manual. Without minimizing the handicaps mostly beyond our control, it should be noted that the year is going let us real progress achieved through the efforts of Rwandans and friends. We ask them to persevere in the coming year and those that will follow. I have said many times that the path to progress is long.

The recovered peace has allowed the people of Rwanda to complete, i in 1983, the establishment of democratic institutions, in harmony with our Basic Law.

Rwandan asked their representatives at the last ordinary congress of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development to support the presidential candidate of M.R.N.D. they agreed to elect to the Presidency of the Republic with a majority that is not far from unanimous. In dignity and foresight they selected themselves their representatives in the National Development Council, with permanent vigilance M.R.N.D. This Council will be installed shortly to continue without delay to provide the country with legislation it needs for its harmonious development. I must congratulate the Rwandans for these gestures they have wisely laid. I congratulate all those who come to receive the trust of their voters and all who honestly have provided their efforts to earn that trust, I mean all parliamentary candidates. Everyone was not elected. It was predictable, the number of places is legally fixed and limited. Those who do not obtain the favorable vote does not want their competitors or their constituents; they accept the verdict of the people. We do not want the country to know the same electoral regrettable consequences than those prevailing once.

The same climate of peace and harmony which I advocated in announcing the elections that have just taken place should remain the rule of conduct for all of us. All those responsible ensure there.

Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development.

The year 1984 was dubbed the year of food production. This means continuing effort to combat erosion, dissemination of selected seeds; it also means smoking our land and therefore marry agriculture farming for the benefit of the rural world.

"YEAR 1984 YEAR OF FOOD PRODUCTION.

May the year 1984 be conducive to the nations, building peace among men, strengthen understanding and cooperation between peoples. "This is, says John Paul II, to renounce violence, falsehood, hatred, becoming - in intentions, sentiments and all his behavior - be a fraternal, which recognizes the dignity and needs of the other, and seeks to cooperate with him to create a world of peace. "

May the year 1984, food production, brings to each of you more hope, happiness and prosperity.

Happy New Year.

