Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, the Fourth Ordinary Congress of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development decided to take me to the head of our movement, pointing to me as well, in accordance with our Constitution, a candidate for the Presidency of the Republic.

On December 19 you have me unanimously re-elected at the head of this country. So it is with emotion, trust and recognition that I address each of you to renew my thanks for the support that I care ^.

My emotion is great, indeed, because I feel, through the vote that was expressed, the deep attachment that shows me every child in this country. With confidence also because it unanimously positive vote I will support unmatched in the heavy load you just renew me. Heavy load, it is true. There are many obstacles in our way. The international situation bodes us bitter days.

Recognition to all of you therefore, Rwandans, who have given me your trust. Words are not enough to express my feelings of gratitude. I will speak through my efforts to lead our country to more happiness and progress.

The Rwandan People just accomplished another important act, another testament to the vitality of our democracy. On 26 December, he chose freely, in the same calm, the same discipline he must be proud, members of the National Development Council. Rejoice with me all these presidential and legislative elections will be held in a climate of peace and unity, eloquent sign of the maturity of the Rwandan people.

Activists, Activists M.R.N.D.,

The National Development Council completes its mandate legislated for two years. He had a great responsibility to provide the country with legislation in line with the aspirations of the Rwandan people and likely to allow it to better fulfill its progress, peace and unity. It did not fail in this noble mission. And I hope that this new assembly continues in the same way. I take this opportunity to reiterate, on behalf of all Rwandans, my thanks to all the Members of the former National Development Council. Let those whose mandate was not renewed know that this is the game of democracy. They continue to work elsewhere without bitterness or rancor, to the socio-economic countries. I pay tribute also to all Ministers and senior officials, without exception, for the work, an often admirably, with abnegation and dedication, all aware of the major challenge posed to our country without fulfilling lack of responsibility, sometimes overwhelming. My deepest gratitude to you all, and to all others who have assumed responsibility, whatever level they are. Thanks to your help, the mandate that the people of Rwanda told me December 24, 1978, ended with a largely positive.

I would now like to trace the program you that my Government, with the support of every citizen of our country, will strive to run in search of well-being of each and every Rwandan Rwandans.

The pessimistic international situation, the economic situation that results for our country, in addition to our own problems, lead me to place the next Government Program under the abbreviations of the ESSENCE and DIALOGUE.

RIGOR, because we can not afford to live beyond our means. As these means are, of necessity, limited management resources must be made with the utmost thoroughness and efficiency; by eliminating waste wherever possible; avoiding duplication of efforts, unnecessary red tape, discarding incompetent who, as I could see, still characterize some utilities and parastatals.

RIGOR also meaning: take responsibility at any level whatsoever, knowingly and in accordance with instructions received and pursuing ever truce nor the public good understanding, without trying to evade its responsibilities behind misinterpreted regulations , boards of directors who do not meet, or absent superiors.

Finally, RIGOR means: honesty in management, truth in political, sincerity of motives.

CONSULTATION: should go with rigor. Often in the past, despite the exhortations that I constantly provide, some officials have failed to understand how the success of their businesses is conditional on consultation with those who also have a say in decisions, either their own areas of responsibility are affected, whether they must undergo the effect of decisions taken.

I ask all my staff, at whatever level they are, to understand, as I have had time to say also that it is no longer possible for specific actions, or piecemeal reform . Only the definition and implementation of comprehensive strategies, integrated policies, concerted and coherent programs will enable us to meet the demands of our time. Effective management of the structural transformation of our economy, our society is at stake. The recent implementation of a food strategy and the launch of an energy strategy respond with excellence to this fundamental concern, which is to integrate all our efforts to optimize our resources and minimize waste and dispersion of our efforts.

CREDIBILITY acquired by the Rwandan people must not be affected. Each manager will understand that his mission is to work for the good of all our people. And it is important that our goals are clearly explained, that the means used are clearly identified, that corporate actions are verifiable, an ongoing evaluation can indicate progress and an increased dialogue between all actors could daily afford to bring us ever closer to our goals. It will therefore, even more than in the past, to match our resources with our stated objectives and to ensure that the state budget reflects a visible and as convincingly as possible the real priorities of Government policy.

To face the challenges ahead, the President of the Republic, Head of Government, will have through a central administration reformulated and energized, a strike force, a coherent, where responsibilities are clearly defined, where dialogue is institutionalized, where the assessment of the progress of cases is facilitated and where the instructions are quickly achievable.

To do this, a Ministry will be attached to the Presidency of the Republic. This role will be to assist the Head of Government to better monitor the progress of cases, the implementation of directives and ensure that greater consistency exists within the administration.

The problems become more complex every day, more varied, more numerous. The function of the Minister to the Presidency of the Republic will be the one to help the Head of State to coordinate the entire government machinery to monitor workflow and assume its arbitration role when necessary.

To better emphasize the importance I attach to better coordinate the operation of all the political institutions of the country, a Ministry, the organization must be not heavy, will be in charge of institutional relations. It will help the President of the Republic to perform his constitutional duties, including those for ensuring the separation and collaboration of powers, supreme guardian of the Constitution and guarantees the independence of the Judiciary.

Militants of M.R.N.D.,

Since I took the high responsibility of leading this country, July 5, 1973, I based my political action on Peace - Unity and Development. That remains my goal. This is why the Ministry of Internal Affairs will be responsible for not only the conduct of domestic policy of the country but also as a main objective the promotion of Communal Development. The Municipality is the basic unit of development, we have repeatedly emphasized this aspect.

It is therefore required that department an effort to innovation and reflection to push municipalities to support the definition of their needs, mobilize their human and material resources around projects designed and developed independently and who turn to the solution of community problems. This means not only adequate administrative structures, but it also means economic organization itself that will see developed a fabric of economic activity controlled by the people themselves.

It is also this Ministry which now plan the UMUGANDA, centerpiece of our efforts to mobilize all our energies. It is of great interest to all of us that actions under the UMUGANDA always better reflect the true aspirations of our people and they are always more integrated into the priorities and defined emergencies and felt by towns . The Community Centers Development and Continuing Education and the Development of Social Centers will now be the responsibility of the same Ministry, because it will bring together in a single instance all the elements influencing the communal development.

The National Development Council will have to decide on updating the law on the organization and common operating. The project is currently under review in the ladder of accomplishment of the mission imposed on this department.

The Fourth Ordinary Congress of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development recommended to communal to manage the municipal heritage officials, including finance. This department will carry out inspections and regular checks to detect pests of municipal funds in time. The property of municipalities must be well managed and used only for the benefit of the integral development of communities.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

The Department of Justice's main task is to promote adequate judicial organization meets the felt needs of the population in the area of ​​justice, organize administrative control of the courts, tribunals and prosecution, coordinate legislation, to ensure the smooth running of the administrative and judicial litigation and, finally, to ensure good organization of work in prisons and rehabilitation centers and production.

Since the advent of the Second Republic, the Department has boomed organizationally. This development must meet the primary mission of this department is that of making a healthy justice. Judicial reform should aim for that goal. Judicial reform that is conducting the Ministry of Justice has yet to be completed by the adoption or development of various specific texts.

I thus think of the bills concerning the organization of the Court of Cassation, Council of State and the Constitutional Court. I also think of the organization of judicial review, that is to say an exceptional legal remedy required urgently by the IV Congress of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development.

And all of this reform will be finally completed by the consideration of a prison reform which will effectively improve the fate of detainees, ensuring their production in the framework of respect for human rights, accordance with our Constitution. I urge all authority Judicial Police - Officers and Sub - Gendarmes Officers - Officers of the Service Central Intelligence, to remember that their mission is to protect the law, ensuring its implementation by means of force if necessary. But they are themselves subject to the law, they must scrupulously respect. Respect for the law is the main instrument to remove the reported abuses such as arbitrary arrests and detentions.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

In order to bring justice closer to litigants, new courts of Canton and new rooms of the Forum first courts were created, and in this ", matters the program is that each municipality has its own court of Canton and that 'at each Sub - Prefecture is created a Chamber of the Tribunal of first instance of the spring.

The Ministry of Justice in collaboration with the Department of National Defense, will continue to fight vigorously against vagrancy and banditry, the main source of insecurity in the country.

The head of the Department of Justice will vigorously fight all discrepancies in services dependent on this department: laziness, irresponsibility and corruption so that the people have full confidence in the justice done in his name. It is known to crack, with renewed vigor, against pests of public funds and against all acts of corruption.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

The Ministry of Public Service is primarily responsible for recruiting and management of the Central Administration of staff and the placement of job seekers in the private sector. He also oversees the training and development of state agents. It must, finally, maintain the law and regulations relating to working conditions and social security for employees of both the public and the private sector.

At this habitual task, I added that vocational training to enable him to better highlight the functional relationship between vocational training, employment and public service. Our future will depend greatly on the promotion of vocational training at all levels and in all places. It is she who will be generating essential for future job opportunities and industrialization technology acquisition of all trades and management. That's why one of the first priorities of this Department will be developing a strategy for training and its rapid implementation, with all that this implies in terms of the impeccable management of the integration grants consequent trained people in positions appropriate to their qualifications, in terms of legislation. I want to clarify that the role of this department is not a substitute for training taking place already, and often successfully, in companies, public and private, or within other ministries. His duty is rather to coordinate what is done, to have a global vision and to ensure that all conditions are met for vocational training can be pushed in an effective manner and that no massive opportunity training is lost due to negligence or bureaucratic red tape and that unmet training needs are promptly addressed.

In my speech - of 8 January 1979 program, I recalled that our administrations suffered from performance failure, particularly because of a let-go, coupled with a notorious lack of discipline that characterize some of our leaders a few levels . I asked when the struggle against administrative inaction is continued, stimulating the right elements, straightening, fairly and on time, the errors found and discarding the incorrigible. This task was entrusted to the Department of Public Service and its recommendations will soon be considered by the Government.

Pursuant to the resolution of the Fourth Congress of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, this department will work to accelerate the recruitment procedure for state employees. Indeed, the administrative delays in this area is not only detrimental to the successful candidates to employment but also to the State which deprives inappropriately frames he desperately needed.

Militants of M.R.N.D.,

The Union of Workers of Rwanda is being officially born in our country and in accordance with our constitution and the manifesto of our Movement, which advocates the association of workers to defend their interests. It is important to remember that such an association must have as its first objective the encouragement of its members to high efficiency. This is why the Central Committee of the Movement said that the said union will be integrated into our Movement like URAMA and the National Revolutionary Movement of the Youth for Development (JMRND) in accordance with Article 65 of the Statutes National Revolutionary Movement for Development.

Also in order to allow this fledgling organization to better meet its goal to educate the world of work in development of the country, there will be parallel with the restructuring of the Association of Employers in Rwanda whose existence n ' is fictitious. These two associations created and revitalized épauleront the Government in the development of social legislation adapted to our socio-economic realities and to the rapid development of the country.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

The Ministry of Finance and Economy will coordinate all matters relating to financial policy, budgetary and trade credits. These three themes constituting an organic entity, the Ministry will now be responsible for harmonizing our economic policies which will further put into practice our philosophy of planned liberalism. This means that the Government, to the principles of free enterprise and the development of private initiatives, but in a context favorable to the national interests of Rwanda, seriously ensure its economic and monetary management, as well as stability the economic environment, sine qua non of a true self development. The priority for this department will be to balance the budget we imposed by the Constitution.

For 4 years, the state intervention in the various fields of economic activity and social resulted in a significant increase in public spending outpacing revenue growth in the same period.

In addition the environment of the international economic situation has exacerbated the imbalance of public finances in particular concerning revenues on foreign trade.

Faced with this situation, the Government should adopt a package of measures aimed at restoring the balance necessary for sound economic management and that we are otherwise required by the constitution.

It will be first to adopt a kind of austerity policies to cut spending and to avoid waste.

So he asked each department to strictly enforce the law on public finances and the various guidelines of the Ministry of Finance and Economy in budget management. U is reminded about that no expenditure may be incurred without the prior approval of the Inspector General of Finance. Organizations enjoying financial autonomy must also respect the budget adopted by the competent bodies.

In addition, during the development and adoption of the budget, the competent authorities shall make major cuts on some items on which attention should be particularly drawn.

Regarding personnel costs, there should be noted that they represent almost 2/3 of the regular budget expenses. It will be necessary therefore to deal with other expenses, limiting new hires and the Administration rid of unprofitable items.

The state of our public finances also requires us to significantly reduce expenses for household and transport equipment. Particularly concerning these will require that managers ensure that maintenance and fuel expenses do not exceed their allotted.

The open policy of the Second Republic led the Government to provide the necessary effort to make our voice heard in international forums. The cost of participation is a heavy burden to our budget. It is for this reason that the Department concerned should continue efforts to program and select different missions outside depending on budget availability.

In recent years, the state had to pay large sums as grants to public establishments. It seems however that this support from the Government has not pushed managers to improve the profitability of their businesses. Under these conditions and to limit the abuse interventions Treasury, the State will grant more subsidies to the Public Institutions for industrial or commercial character recognition that they can have access to bank loans. Regarding Public Institutions social, the state intervention will be an agreement specifying the amount relating thereto and the actions to be financed.

As for the problems related to municipal finances, the Government must respect the guidelines adopted by the Central Committee at its meeting of 28 February to 2 March 1983.

In recent years, the global economic situation has deteriorated, resulting in worsening the specific difficulties of the poorest countries. Our country already disadvantaged by its geographical location, has felt the effects of this global crisis. the national economy officials will have to seek ways to cushion as far as possible, impact. On the recommendation of an ad hoc committee, the Government has taken a series of important measures to restructure our economy and to cope with the continued deterioration of the balance of payments. Given that some of these measures may have the long-term effects, I ask the leaders of relevant departments to be vigilant and monitor closely the effective implementation of all the measures taken.

This rigorous management should be accompanied by regular monitoring of agents called to handle public funds such as accountants and managers of credit. It is often remarked, indeed, that some malpractices are consecutive to the negligence of agents assigned to the control and irregular inspections of public accounting.

In addition to the sanitation budget management, the Ministry of Finance and Economy will take measures to increase state revenue, since many income and taxes outside the Treasury by the fault, and sometimes complacency, agents services Tax and Customs. Although traders and businessmen wear a thousand tricks to evade taxes, it must also condemn the complicity of some officers lacking professionalism and for which the personal interest and love of lucre eclipse awareness of the common good and the spirit of loyalty.

Some of the measures that can contribute to increase state revenues consist of the revision of the tariff, improving the tax base and selective increase in admissions rates for certain products.

This will be even more favor the importation of mass consumer products. In doing so, the Ministry of Finance and Economy and Trade will attach particular importance to the gradual takeover of the trade of import - export by nationals. This department will continue tirelessly educating merchants and the role assigned to the Chamber of Commerce and industry in this area is irreplaceable. This body will be restructured a consultation center between the businessmen and entrepreneurs with the Public Administration on issues related to trade and industry. It will also serve as an instrument of information and training in management and commerce. And any initiative is welcome to establish an effective system for the protection of consumers. I have to remember that the course of trade is not an end in itself, rather it should lead to the promotion of other sectors of job-creating activities and that may allow the country to save foreign exchange and to depend less on the outside.

Militants,

The few good years we had the chance to live were able to create in the minds of several ministerial officials the impression that these periods had preferred the normal state of things. And unconcerned about the economic reality, these leaders have urged the Government of Rwanda in reckless spending, often without visa requirements of the Ministry of Finance, regardless of their limitations imposed by the Finance Act. And I was told that the Government must now several hundred million Rwandan francs to companies and local companies, for services invoices, goods that ministries are not able to pay. This is all the more unacceptable that one does not see how the Government may impose discipline on the matter, while it is he who gives bad example. And how to live the tax system, if companies are immersed in cash situations that might strangle them? The situation is serious, and now to prevent any repetition of this situation, action will now be considered with respect to departmental officials or parastatals that engage the public treasury without having received authorization legally prescribed. At the same time, the instruction is given to the Ministry of Finance and Economy to purify, to the companies and local businesses, by March 31, 1984 all accounts, provided with the authorization provided by the inspector General of Finance as stipulated in the law on Public Accounting. It will take that on 1 April 1984 the Government had fully liquidated all regular debts from 1983 and before, if applicable.

At the same time, I appeal to our companies, loggers and companies not to encourage, by excessively loose credit policies, some government officials to make expenditures that have not received approval from the Ministry of Finance and Economy or play an indelicate competition by dangling long periods of payment. However, I invite all companies whose bills were regularly referred to, but that would not have been paid on time, to seize without fault the Minister of Finance and 1'Economie that needed to be done . It is imperative that the financial management of government be blameless in all views and I will not tolerate any exception to the principles of credibility and rigor that I have highlighted for the next Government. We owe it to the great majority of our country, that is to say, the families of our farmers and ranchers who must live with them often minimal budget and with which they must eat, dress, educate their children improve habitat. And they also can not live beyond their means. These principles must also be and remain valid for the Government as a whole. We have an emergency plan and sanitation economic management.

Three other areas of concern must find immediately a quick solution to restore order in our economy and to ensure the sound and steady growth:

the recovery in the management of public companies; public debt management; the productivity of investments.

The Central Accounting and Organization, attached to the Presidency of the Republic, is gradually established. It will help the consolidation of our parastatals, some are in a rather precarious situation.

The management of the public debt must be improved and be a close and careful planning.

The investment policy should primarily be focused on increasing productivity. really quickly productive investment and must now help us more to clean up our economy.

MINISTRY OF INDUSTRY, MINES AND CRAFTS: now bring together everything related to the self-centered industrialization of Rwanda, agribusiness, mining, crafts, that is ie all projects of the industrial type.

This grouping will allow to introduce the coherence necessary to harmonize our efforts in industrialization, eliminate duplication and to devise a coherent approach in this area to meet the needs and aspirations of our country. A primary task and eventually will lead quickly to the Department to develop a strategy, coordinated and integrated, industrialization and self-centered endogenous our country. It goes without saying that this will require a major industrialization imagination: it can only be done through the promotion of a decentralized rural industrialization, promoting small and even the small entrepreneur and focusing on non-governmental networks .

This department must immediately take all necessary measures to ensure the existing industrial enterprises normal operation. As part of the strategy of industrialization, it is important to identify the criteria and set priorities based on the needs of the country. In this regard, it will primarily study sysystématiquement products of processing possibilities food crop that can be sold on the domestic market and régional.S'il should develop the food storage system, we must recognize its limitations and use in agri-food industrial units for processing products such as beans, tomatoes, potatoes, ... and building materials industries. In doing so it will exploit all the possibilities of recovery and develop a series of agricultural waste transformation projects (parchment coffee, molasses, rice bran and wheat) and industrial such as grains. Such a strategy will be accompanied by industrial decentralization measures to help slow the rural exodus. Industrial units should be located as close as possible to their source of raw materials and regionalization will be facilitated by the construction of adequate facilities, extended to the entire territory.

Activists, Activists,

Food production will be a priority for government action. The Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Forestry will be primarily responsible for everything related to food strategy that is to say the Rwandan food self-sufficiency. Main defender of our farmers and peasants, the main producers of our country, there will be the spokesperson and ensure anywhere, any time that their interests are defended in the most efficient manner. He is devoted to the promotion of rural particularly through regional projects of integrated development and dissemination of selected seeds.

I also come back to the need to combine agriculture and livestock. We already know that the livestock can produce essential to our diet, but in addition, it ensures the production of essential fertilizer for soil amendment with no fallow is no longer possible to recover. Moreover, given the lack of pasture, one can not consider long-term expansion of livestock operations without adequate substitution. Therefore it is requested to the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Forestry to hasten the creation of a food producing company for livestock.

The Ministry of Planning will ensure, for its part in monitoring the Development Plan Economic, Social and Cultural. If. So far it seemed to believe that the Ministry of Planning may be able to locate ^ ministries for the development of the Plan, a role he could obviously provide, the Ministry of Planning dedicates himself, with regards its planning and programming function, the pooling of various strategies including the development will be the result of various ministries and whose reorganization has been specifically designed to address this need today more and more pressing, namely, to determine the skills and ministerial fields of action based on broad strategic issues of development of our society and our economy.

This pooling, this synthesis must seek alignment between strategies, possible arbitration proposals on priorities given the limited resources, financial planning and time investment, valuing the regional level as important step in any planning.

This sharing will allow to undertake, in 1985, the preparation of our Fourth Five-Year Plan. This is why the greatest importance and urgency will be given to the development of operational strategies in the Ministries and need, requirement of time, control more and more conceptual and organizational capacity of the tasks entrusted to them. With global vision acquired by the Plan team, it will be able, in turn, favorably stimulate the different departments involved in strategy development. The other major feature of the new Ministry of Planning will be that of the inspection and evaluation function will be greatly enhanced. A plan makes sense only if its implementation is monitored. So Assessment of the progress of the Plan, implementation strategies, cooperation programs and in some cases even projects for the results of this assessment, this monitoring, this monitoring can be integrated to share and a dynamic feedback between assessment and actions can constantly improve the performance of our action programs.

It will ensure more than ever that our statistical system is up to date and constantly improved. This department will also be responsible to a data plan of government services to avoid duplication of effort already noted in this field.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND ENERGY, now coordinate the areas of public works Energy and water whose functional interrelationships allow much better integration of actions. Among its main tasks included the consistent implementation of energy policy which Rwanda has adopted the strategy development of the water and the establishment, without delay, a BOTTOM ROAD. The main effort has in recent years focused on the asphalting of trunk roads and the development of the Kanombe International Airport, known as Gregoire Kayibanda Airport. The effort will continue. Eventually, we will have a diverse network, fast and reliable. In the coming years the Government will continue to make representations to the donors in order to pave the other major arteries.

Besides the transport infrastructure sector, we should also talk about the development of energy and its importance to our country. Lu Rwanda has sufficient electrical installations for certain regions; we have solar energy, methane gas in Lake Kivu, biomass; we reforest our mountains and hills. All this constitutes a significant source of energy that we need to increase and especially learning to use rationally. Water, source of life and energy source, has always attracted the attention of the government. In 1981, I asked the people to multiply the efforts for research and use of drinking water. Already 37% of the population are served. It is still little but important compared to the initial situation. Our next efforts will be to still deprived areas. I wish the control of rainwater also attracted the attention of officials.

National Hydropower generation will be widely promoted and in a few years the country will have an interconnected network of power transmission lines connecting the main economic and social centers in the electric production centers. The extension of this network must be coupled with the search for a energy prices accessible to a number of households and small and medium enterprises.

The Cadastre service will now be attached to the department that handles planning. The urbanization of our country has accelerated in recent years. So far the main effort was focused on improving the main urban centers often without adequate urban planning instruments. Now the country has a satisfactory conceptual tool in urban planning. The main cities (Kigali, Butare, Gisenyi and Ruhengeri) already have their master plans, while others will soon feature.

Our long-term goal is to provide all agglomerations of a plan due regard to their importance. To do this, the departments concerned should apply to delineate approached agglomerations be provided with a management plan, such as the capitals of the sub-prefectures, the seats of municipalities and major shopping centers.

It will therefore organize a provisional planning, may anticipate the needs of urbanization increasing rapidly, so that all agglomerations are experiencing a planned development. The time has come to end a catch-up planning.

Improving our roads will facilitate a more rational organization of transport, land, lake and air, which field will handle the Ministry of Transport and Communications.

In its action, the Department will strengthen its capacity for planning, organization and control of public and private transport. To this end, it is important to put an end to many abuses in the use of state cartage. Particular attention should also be paid to improving the regulation of the passenger to ensure their safety. It will ensure, in connection with other relevant departments, to adjust our fleet to the essential needs of the nation. In addition, the tariffs shall always be done in order to safeguard both the interests of carriers and users.

In telecommunications, the same department will do everything possible for Rwanda to have gradually reliable links, quick and diverse as the outside between different regions of the country. To this end, it will continue the process already started modernization of the equipment and network automation.

Furthermore, the postal services will receive more attention. It is therefore important that they are equipped, according to the possibilities, new buildings, a suitable and sufficient equipment and above all competent and honest staff. The management and control of these services will have to be more rigorous in order to curb malpractices that hamper their work.

Militants,

Education is one of the most demanding sectors must develop our country. However the means still lacking, places at secondary and university remain insufficient. And there are the difficulties of adapting to school life, shortage of teaching materials, inadequate qualification of teachers at different levels, overcrowding of certain classes without forgetting all the problems related to the revaluation the teaching career and collaboration with all people interested in the educational process.

The increase in the school population, a result of population growth, will continue to raise difficult problems in the infrastructure of school facilities and teachers.

The trend of increased enrollment is almost irreversible because it corresponds to a strong demand combined with concern for social advancement of all Rwandans and to improve socio-economic conditions of the population.

There is no need to emphasize that the state can not alone cope with all these problems. Also he counts on the support of everyone of you, in its difficult task of enabling all young people to enjoy their right to education. In this regard, I wish to thank all the activists and all activists for the efforts they continue to provide, as part of UMUGANDA or by any other means, to build schools. My thanks also go to all the promoters of private schools, serious, honest and conscientious, who help the state and parents to develop education and training in our country. I called again and the various religious communities, associations, companies and any other person or entity, for they help the Government to increase our school infrastructure.

Halfway through the Third Plan and the 4th year of the implementation of school reform, we note that significant progress has been made, although much of the program has yet to achieve. There are, indeed, be noted in the context of a positive balance

the level of primary education, increasing educational infrastructure, increased enrollment rates, accelerating the pace of training new teachers and retraining of those who are in place; the level of rural education and integrated craft, the state is committed to operate at least two CERAI by town; the level of secondary education, the significant increase in secondary school capacity.

School reform must be constantly adapted to the realities of our country and be more inspired sound advice technicians of education. To do this will require particularly strict schedule the creation of courses, taking into account the anticipated needs of the labor market, carry out regular evaluation of programs and teaching methods and be in frequent contact with teachers listen, help and encourage them.

As desired the IVth National Congress of M.R.N.D., the state will spare no effort to ensure better management and democratization of our education. The Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education will therefore endeavor to put into practice and the decisions of Congress IVth including by ensuring the strict implementation of directives adopted by the Congress on the secondary admission to improving girls' enrollment in the second degree, the development of the system of clerkship at improving student / teacher ratio and teacher development.

Relevant measures should be taken to improve the quality of education, training more teachers and raise their level of training, tailor programs to the new requirements, promote the use of appropriate teaching materials and modern teaching techniques, make more effective supervision of teachers by experienced inspectors and dynamic, encourage and promote the effective participation of users and beneficiaries of education in the organization and operation of our educational system, improve planning mechanisms, ensuring the optimal use of available resources.

As was recalled in January 1982, the education reform must continue also to the next level.

Progress in this context are already noticeable. Indeed, university education has, in recent years, together in a single institution composed of two decentralized units and different vocation. Central bodies, sufficiently representative, were established for the purpose to guide and control the management of this establishment. At a higher level, a specialized department was created especially to promote in our country higher education and to address the major problems of the university.

The results obtained through these measures, however, are still limited by many gaps and obstacles.

The problems of higher education will therefore continue to hold the attention of the Government. This will apply through the Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research, the future development of the university in its organization, its programs and research, so that it can make an important contribution to the development and improvement of other levels of education and progress of the various sectors of the national economy. To this end, the departments concerned will in particular make every effort to adapt the options to the real needs of our society, harmonizing secondary output profiles with input profiles at the university, in order to better provide guidance students, improve and optimize training students, to recruit competent and conscientious teachers, organize the recycling of teachers continue training Rwandan executives at the 3rd cycle.

As for the scientific and technical research, she will receive a new impetus and will be directed towards productivity so as to have a real impact on the development of our country. It will, in this regard, prevent the dominance of research in academic trend too, with no foreseeable impact on the living conditions of the population.

With support from the National Scientific and Technical Research Center for Development being created, this department will ensure the planning, programming and coordination of research activities in all areas, further promote the training and development of researchers hasten the development of the status of researchers and help to the extent of its ability, to the publication of research with proven value.

I ask again to managers to appeal mostly to university to study solutions of some problems of our development. And to encourage all forces to respond to this call, I propose to create a prize to reward annually the best work on the development of Rwanda. The Government will also continue to promote our culture. The cultural development of our country is, indeed, an essential part of its overall development. This is why the Government will continue to grant Rwandan culture a place in the programs of education at all levels, to spread this culture by all available means of communication. Rwandan culture must give up its static state and be revitalized to help further the mobilization of our people for their integral development.

THE MINISTRY OF YOUTH AND COOPERATIVE MOVEMENT; will be responsible to control one of the most crucial problems for our future, namely, the national vocation of our young people, girls and boys. It is certainly through the cooperative movement and private associations that it will be possible to find the first adequate and quick solutions to the problems of giving our youth a useful occupation, producer, and, for them, rewarding for them to contribute, to the extent of their enthusiasm and generosity, the progress of our country while finding there their account and ensuring an ever better quality of life. It is therefore of utmost importance that officials of the Ministry put in motion a broad consultation process and dialogue to present an action plan, ie d., A strategy of mobilizing our youth the benefit of the young people themselves and the development of our country entirely. Such a strategy will, knowingly, to predict the necessary measures and to mobilize all resources, internal and external, needed to attack us with "" success at this decisive issue for our future. At the same time, this will .de better reflect our firm conviction, that is, give full scope to the movement of cooperatives and associations (mutual aid, mutual benefit, solidarity), which are only able to help equip the rural areas of a fabric of economic organization that resists the more shock and whose promises are those of our economic future.

To manage its field, this Ministry will now include all bodies concerned with young people, currently divided between several ministries, including the Civic Youth Service, but with the exception of Rehabilitation Centers and Production, attached to Ministry of Justice.

We comply and the requirements of our Movement which wants rural development is oriented to engage the youth, who must also feel fully responsible in the pursuit of progress. We must acknowledge some positive developments in recent years: extensive studies to define the youth situation of our country, organizing periodic seminars for managers at various levels, creating socio-economic groups and youth projects, support to movements and associations young people regardless of gender. But the road is still very long. This work of mobilization and leadership will be crowned in the coming years by an integrated organization within the MRND, the National Revolutionary Movement for Development of Youth, which will unite all the youth of the country in accordance with democratic principles of our movement, to put into practice the ideals of it in the economic, social and cultural, for better participation in the development of the country.

Sport and recreation have made real progress. It is a duty that our movement requires us to organize sports interest to all communities in the country and to not only provide intellectual and physical relaxation, but above all to cultivate the spirit of brotherhood, esteem mutual between people, safeguard the morals and serve mobilization means. We do not need to take stock in this area. The media have regularly kept abreast of sports events over the whole of the Republic and even outside the country. Our sports facilities are still insufficient but about to be improved and increased. Sports and recreation after work.

The social area has always been one of our main concerns in the context of mobilizing the population for the common effort of national development.

There is reason to welcome here the progress made by our news media to educate the people and keep it informed. Efforts are still multiplying in respect of journalistic ethics, truth, people and their opinions. The main task assigned to these bodies is that of informing the people for the form. The priority information should be reserved for the benefit of the people. Our newspapers to know that the struggle we have committed is that against poverty, ignorance, hunger and disease. Our news media understand that they have the same mission, they must be held by the same ideal, that of breathing and impart to their readers, a climate of unity, peace and development commitment.

In my speech program from August 1, 1973, I said that the people must be informed of each development project is concerned, so that there participate knowingly.

The President of the Republic, Ministers and all those responsible should approach the people. The press must draw information in different departments, in the prefectures and municipalities, so that united in thought and in action, we are moving towards progress. The man of the press is the link between the rulers and the ruled. Leaders, he said the guidelines, and directed it plucks the wishes and aspirations. So that power is actually serving the people. The true journalist is not the one who delights in disrespectful or critical. The true journalist is one who seeks the truth and shows, which warns against the actions and behavior contrary to the spirit of the Manifesto of our movement and our culture. It respects the other and avoids to appear like an irresponsible idealist. A good journalist is the watchful eye of the people and the attentive and honest adviser of authority.

I am more and more convinced of the interdependence and correlation between social problems (demography - health - nutrition centers ...) and issues related to Public Health.

THE MINISTRY OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS: therefore will now integrate and coordinate much better than it was the case, the action to be taken on the Social Affairs plan with those that affect public health. These areas form a coherent entity of problems in itself. Thus, family planning and promotion, Feeding Centers, demographic problems, hygiene, whose impact on the improvement of the social environment is undeniable, and some actions are directly related to Public Health and found new vigor. Their integration with public health planning is intended to make the action of the Ministry still more relevant, visible and effective. The focus of the tasks of this Ministry is to put on preventive medicine.

Militants of M.R.N.D.,

According to the manifesto of our Movement "investment in health matters should be encouraged by the fact that it improves the health of the population, primary factor of our development effort." The effort has been reinforced under the 2nd Republic, in order to provide the country with adequate sanitation. I, from July 5, 1973, called for mass medicine, more focused on the most vulnerable groups such as children, mothers and workers. This commitment has resulted in the establishment of medical training in rural areas. The same effort is to continue to achieve the objective that we fixed our five-year plan running, namely: increasing the number of our hospitals and rural health centers as well as the development and enlargement existing ones.

I ask those responsible for public health do everything in their power to equip some of our hospitals of men and equipment that can help us reduce the huge cost of medical care abroad that also remain accessible to a small number of our citizens.

Militants of M.R.N.D.,

Since the advent of the Second Republic, Rwanda has adopted a foreign policy inspired by the fundamental rules defined by the United Nations - United, with particular emphasis on the objectives of good neighborliness and openness to the world. We have always sought to promote an increasingly active and more active cooperation with the neighbors, with other developing countries and all peace-loving country, freedom and justice. The Rwanda will remain true to this philosophy. He will continue to play an active role in regional organizations of which it is a member. This desire for openness constitutes a fundamental element in our foreign policy to consolidate the credit which our country enjoys in the community of nations.

As I reminded January 8, 1982, faithful to the principles of mutual respect, non-alignment, peaceful coexistence and active cooperation and the spirit of the Manifesto of the MRND, the Government of the Second Republic has not failed to build on the positive experience of other nations to get out of the rut of underdevelopment. It will maintain and strengthen this policy under the IVth Congress of the recommendations of M.R.N.D. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Cooperation will lead the diplomacy of cooperation both bilaterally and multilaterally. Our diplomatic missions abroad will be guided in their work, the resolution of the Congress that recommended the continuation of this policy of openness and the relentless pursuit of everything that can contribute to the development of our country.

Militants of M.R.N.D.,

In recent years, Rwanda has received significant support from the international community, through technical and financial assistance. Our country must rely on its own forces.Mais international aid will long need to supplement the insufficiency of our own.

We know, to remain optimistic that this will help settle. We must, in our cooperation strategy, seek to do more with less.

Is it necessary to recall our support for self-determination of peoples. Our contempt for the degrading policy of apartheid, racism. We condemn the use of force and the arms race resulting in a shameful waste of resources that should be devoted to more objectives that the welfare and development of man. Faithful to the principles of its foreign policy enshrined in the Manifesto of M.R.N.D., the Government will maintain an active diplomacy in the service of peace, a prerequisite for the harmonious development and rapprochement between peoples and international cooperation.

Activists, Activists M.R.N.D.,

As in the past, peace and security everywhere and by all, will continue to be among the primary concerns of the Government, which will have to seek ways of this policy of peace and tranquility, both within that the borders of our country. Good neighborliness and peaceful coexistence, the two constants of the Fifth Republic, will be saved through cooperation and permanent dialogue both bilaterally and in the framework of our sub-regional organizations with our immediate neighbors. It will be the same inner peace that will remain the object of the most attentive care of all the living forces of the nation.

From birth, the Second Republic has agreed to sit down at all costs the peace and unity of the Rwandan people. I can say without vain satisfaction that this bet was widely held. The Armed Forces have not failed in their duty to keep in check all destabilizing forces. All other service attendants to public order and the MRND organs lent strong hand to the saving action, business July 5th, 1973. The balance of ten years of the Second Republic is the measure of our optimism and determination despite our passengers discomfort episodes, such as subversion campaign of March-April 1980 and the influx of refugees into our territory which also remained a problem until today no final solution . And especially during the legislature ends, and that security was placed under the sign of maintaining and strengthening peace everywhere by a struggle without thank you against the troublemakers, the government has made every effort to ensure that the Armed Forces are always at the height of the mission which is theirs, namely maintaining inner peace, protect the integrity of the national territory and to participate in the country's development community efforts. Thus the Army continues to develop. The National Gendarmerie made progress in implementing its units throughout the territory. The instruction and training, infrastructure construction and acquisition of essential equipment required to always be adapted to both the magnitude and easements of the objective pursued in a context whose mechanisms often escape our control, since external, but also the constraints imposed by the limited resources of the country. I nonetheless maintain, as far as possible, in the Five Year Development Plan 1982 - 1986, the efforts begun for this important sector of national life, which can not be neglected without compromising security and independence the country continues to earn the trust of the people, both in terms of capacity and in terms of discipline. The integration of the Armed Forces to other living forces of the nation for development is a given. It is only mentioned, as an example, the achievements made by the Armed Forces as part of the community development work - UMUGANDA - often in collaboration with the working population or with other state officials.

The Department of National Defense will remain the primary responsibility for this chapter of development that are the organization, training and management of the Armed Forces. It will require its personnel at all levels, self-sacrifice and high sense of duty. It will ensure rationalize the use of human resources and the use of material resources to achieve efficiency, while containing costs, so as to keep the charges at the sacrifices that the country is able to consent. It will focus on completing the integration of the Armed Forces to the development effort of the country, given that their primary mission is the protection of peace and the integrity of the national territory, keeps primacy over any other concern. This is why the instruction of Units as well as training and education managers must constantly improve. The school curriculum and instruction centers must be updated. Thus the enforcement texts of the law organizing the Ecole Supérieure Militaire, the status of the School of Sub - Officers will emerge, not only to better meet the needs of the Armed Forces, but also to not remain on the sidelines of the reform of our system of education at all levels. The status of reservists Armed Forces, defining their rights and duties, will also be among the priority tasks.

It does not seem superfluous to recall at this solemn occasion that the defense and security of the country is not the case of the only military. Everyone is concerned because the defense of peace and tranquility is global and requires all patriotism and vigilance; every citizen, without distinction, is responsible for his safety and that of his fellow citizens. It is the duty of leaders at all levels to educate the population to reach the maturity required by his civic duties, compliance with which is a guarantee of the rights of every citizen. The authorities as an administrative policy should penetrate their role to supervise the population acting by example, so that peace and tranquility prevail everywhere, thanks to the combined efforts of all, creating conditions for development Full people of Rwanda.

I can not finish a statement outline the government program reminiscent of the great interest that we show towards our national parks and our reserves.

In the world increasingly dominated by technology, exploitation of nature, we must intensely involved in the fight for the protection of nature, both in our national interest properly for the preservation of a heritage that belongs to while the entire humanity. Moreover, we must never forget that tourism, which is one of our strengths in our struggle for development, is directly conditioned by the existence of our national parks and that is another reason to our duty to protect our wildlife and our flora.

So I must stress the absolute need for an intensive fight against poaching and to this end, I urge the competent authorities to exercise the utmost vigilance and exemplary severity.

Militants of M.R.N.D.,

These are the main lines of action that we will continue, together, in the coming years. As you can appreciate, the outlined program is part of an overall policy to further promote the development of our country. This policy is based on the principles and goals of our Movement, the decisions taken during its different National Congress as well as the guidelines and opinions of the Illème Five-Year Plan for Economic, social and cultural 1982 -1986.

In implementing the program outlined and the achievement of other development actions, the various government departments and services should aim at maximum efficiency. The measures and activities to be undertaken will be of great consistency to enable efficient management of available resources.

I highlighted the principles of integration and cooperation that will characterize even more than before the legislature that we are opening today. The organization of the Central Administration, as I just told you submit Militants also has the purpose of giving back to the whole dialogue a new impetus. I do not hide that this dialogue, despite my relentless exhortations have not always been successful. To avoid these troubles now, the consultation levels will, from today, institutionalized within the Central Administration and which will form the essential framework for the proper functioning of the governmental system in place. These levels are the Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committees, led and chaired by the Minister most concerned with the area being treated. These Committees Interdepartmental Coordination (CIC) will target the areas of rural development, economic policy, industrialization, promotion of youth, communal politics, employment and vocational training, planning and Cooperation. More detailed instructions on the operation of these committees will take place in the coming days.

Activists, Activists,

On the threshold of this year 1984 the Vivrière Production begins the new mandate that the people of Rwanda has entrusted to me, when will solemnly open the i th Legislature of the National Development Council, I wish to reiterate my sincere greetings for the new year. I sincerely hope that 1984 could contribute more to strengthen, within our countries, peace and national unity, to help you always go ahead in the interest of each and all the Rwandan nation.

Following the guidelines of our action to come, I would like to reiterate the expression of my deep gratitude for the trust you have confirmed to me by renewing my mandate as President of the Republic, I count on your continued support for m help to fully assume this burden which I measure all requirements. I know I can always count on you, on the help of each and every one of you to lead this country to greater happiness and success. I promise you again that I will do everything in my power to further promote your own well-being and progress of Rwandan society, for the honor of Rwanda, Unity, Peace and Development.

Activists, Activists,

At the beginning of this mandate, I decided a series of measures pardoning of Rwanda and Rwandans are, to date, definitively convicted in our courts.

The death penalty is commuted to life imprisonment. The imprisonment in time for crime is reduced to half its length. All those sentenced to imprisonment with a term not exceeding five years, are released.

These measures do not however apply to prisoners sentenced for offenses relating to the attack on state security. (Penal Code Book II - Title I - Chapter I).

They do not apply to inmates convicted of offenses relating to armed robbery, as provided for and punished by Articles 403 bis and 403 ter of our penal code for recidivist prisoners, fugitives or escaped prisoners.

The Minister of Justice will take all necessary steps to implement this decision.

Thank you.

