Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

Rwanda is party, rejoice, the 22th anniversary of our nation's independence, the 11th anniversary of the advent of the Second Republic and the 9th anniversary of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development Foundation.

Last year on the same date, I took stock of 10 years of the Second Republic. This assessment was and remains largely positive. But I also stressed that no one better that Rwanda knew suffered failures, deficiencies with which we must live, disabilities that overwhelm us, lost illusions and quite dark deadlines that await us. I take the opportunity today to address a number of our socio-economic concerns and explore solutions that we try to find them. My purpose of this day is the logical continuation of my Keynote Address of January 8 past. This Keynote Address, you will remember, was centered on the principles of rigor, austerity, consensus, credibility and transparency. He threw into relief the importance, for the President of the Republic, to be able to face the challenges ahead, to have a reformulated central, dynamic, where responsibilities are clearly identified. The reorganization of the central administration had also aims to instill a new and vigorous pace the whole Interdepartmental Coordination Committees by the creation of Interdepartmental Coordination, essential framework for the proper functioning of the government in place. This is today done. Unnecessary were discarded. The flowcharts implemented have largely met our expectations and now form this governmental architecture, solid and functional, which is indispensable in order to assume the heavy responsibilities you have entrusted to me.

A special effort was made to fill about 600 positions of responsibility qualified people, trained for the task and responding to human and moral qualities sufficient guarantees. It was a long-term effort, which took more time than I had expected, but the effort was worth it; we need an administration increasingly skilled and increasingly close to the ground. Of course, all is not perfect yet, but improvements were made leading to an ever more noticeable efficiency and ever greater accountability of managers and staff of the Central Administration.

The government machinery is constantly evolving thing and ask constantly new challenges. That is why the Interministerial Coordination Committee on issues relating to employment, continue to regularly discuss issues of government organization to offer their thoughts and recommendations for continuous improvement of our headquarters.

The other part of my speech Program focused on major responsibilities of ministries, according to the priorities of the government program inspired by the principles of the Manifesto of M.R.N.D. I clearly highlighted the main areas of action of each ministry, the principles that should inspire the strategies that will guide us and the evaluation and design elements that each department will have to master more and more within itself . Again, we are making progress, thanks to the implementation of the instructions given by better reflecting the general mandate given to a ministry in action, priorities, deadlines, decisions, initiatives, concrete and operational. The "Task Sheet" are thus being prepared jointly by the Presidency of services under the direction of the Minister for the Presidency, responsible for assisting the President of the Republic to coordinate the entire government machine, and the services of each ministry. Thus it is hoped that we can, much better than in the past, monitor the progress of cases, implementation guidelines and ensure the necessary coherence of the government program.

Activists, Activists

If I insisted once again on the major themes of my Keynote Address, by way of introduction, it is not to repeat things, while important, but to express my deep conviction that we can cope the overwhelming challenges ahead without having the essential management tools, for the government and the central government. What has already been accomplished in this direction in recent months is encouraging, but it is to continue and not to relax. I take this opportunity to speak to each of you, and especially to those who have the privilege of being employed by the government, a warm encouragement to you is released not your efforts and that you exercise your duties to the best of your consciousness. This we owe to all our farming families who, in fact, are our true employers, because it is thanks to them and their work that the state can function. It is by implementing a real administration of development we respond as surely their expectations.

At the same time, I also speak to our MPs for the National Development Council that they fulfill to the best of their knowledge the cause well understood by those who have so brilliantly elected acknowledging their past merits. You will, Activists, Activists, Members of the National Development Council, show yourselves worthy of the new responsibilities which you have been assigned for the population do not regret the choice she focused on you. Strive for unity, fight for the country's development. My wish is not that you have all the same opinions, but you set out the same goal: unity, peace and development. I also want people to know the views of their elected representatives; they must be able discuss and debate so that together you can contribute to the progress of our country. I particularly invite officials ORINFOR, journalists, instances of M.R.N.D. and those of our parliament, the C.N.D., explore and experiment with ways and means for the debates in Parliament, the ideas of our representatives of the people are brought to the knowledge of many. Information must be itself a goal, and that goal is the mobilization of our people for development; our progress is the price.

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

The year 1984 was dubbed "YEAR OF FOOD PRODUCTION". The department responsible for this sector continued its action program: Regionalization of cultures, multiplication of selected seeds, erosion control and reforestation. The population itself followed this slogan. The vast expanses of fields of cassava, potatoes and sorghum reflect these really commendable efforts.

Unfortunately the rains stopped earlier than usual, depriving us of part of our crops. Much of our bean crops, peas, corn and sorghum have been destroyed. The situation is serious but not desperate.

This forced us to divert some of our resources for other purposes, in order to deal with this new emergency, it will not be possible to control only: that is why we have a heavy heart , were forced to consider calling our friendly countries, with whom we cooperate in our development, and we ask them to provide food aid in order to meet the immediate food needs of the midseason.

I am pleased to say that our appeal was heard and we can consider with relief intervention on their part in order to eke of our harvest failure caused by lack of rain.

The Government Council has in turn taken steps to a more intense exploitation of marshes, putting at the disposal of the population more agronomists can support him in his efforts, and more farm tools necessary for implementation fast value of these marshes still available.

We are all called to work for our food and our children is always the first of our worries. Doing our duty. God will surely do his. Many of our brothers and sisters of our continent are in a difficult situation, like our own, and in many cases more difficult, where, despite the efforts of all times, climate hazards continually highlight the fragility of fate so many African countries.

But despite this, and especially because of this, the biggest concern of the President of the Republic and his government, in terms of economic development, remains to implement everything in our measure for our farmers and our farmers could see their income rise steadily, without the snake inflation chipping away their gains.

In fact, the increase in purchasing power, primarily in rural areas, so beneficial to the vast majority of our population is central to our strategy of self-reliance. The increase in purchasing power, especially in rural areas, is the result of the conjunction of a number of measures of economic policies and strategies whose combined effect will help to ensure that economic progress is also fair and as real as possible.

What are the economic factors and the impact that most contribute to this objective? What is evolution and how can we better design our policies to make the most?

Mastering this issue proves more difficult. I will try to present some elements and some of my options. This will allow us to better appreciate the narrow scope of our possibilities of action but also the tireless efforts in involving us and the undeniable results that we can continue to get.

We fortunately, in terms of our export products, a very wide distribution of their products, which can distribute more or less egalitarian revenue in currency that such exports provide us. This is especially true with regard to coffee, the production of which is the fact the owner of the smallholding peasants, unlike many other countries where these products are made of the large farms that can generate the rural proletariat and which by definition often escapes the fruit of his work as a producer. The substantial increase of the price paid in recent years to our coffee producers, namely 120 francs per kilo, making one immediately higher, in real terms, observed in Africa, involved some risk, but we tried to take courage. Since the fixing of this price, and though world prices would later fall dramatically, the Government has done everything and will continue to do everything so that the farmer produces is assured of a return to real money on which it can count and allows him to improve his lot.

I am told that unfortunately too often the farmer is removing a part of what is owed by traders that unscrupulous or cheat with scales or maneuvered so that the peasant, cornered in need of money , they often cede in advance and cheaply, part or all of his crop, harvest bring him much more if he had a marketing choice. That is why I support responsible OCIR-CAFE to address this problem and to propose to the Government the appropriate measures to remedy this state of affairs and to ensure that the farmer affects everything it deserves.

We can not influence the prices of our export products on world markets, it is so we can not now raise the price paid to the producer, especially regarding coffee, although I know that many of our farmers believe that the time came to see coffee prices: the world situation will unfortunately not allow us. But for the efforts of the Government to fully benefit to the national economy, enabling to inject money in our campaigns, it would have on his side the farmer make the necessary efforts to maintain his coffee to keep or to improve performance. There would be nothing that our Government should fight to obtain larger sales quotas, if coffee production does not follow. Never forget that the currency we reported the cafe allow us to buy some things that improve the quality of our lives, but that can only be imported, that is to say, purchased with currency that it either kerosene, whether used clothing, transistors, bicycles, etc ... on the other hand, it will be still better control the marketing channels for the fruit peasant labor is not used to maintain parasitic elements at the expense of the producer. I can assure you that progress has been made; progress can only be slow, as it is true that hostile forces at work are powerful.

So it is both to diversify income of farmers and to ensure rural currencies inflows, while trying to develop the best assets of our country in this field, we will spare no effort to find appropriate and beneficial solutions for our producers to increase their income in a safe and effective manner, and for all our export agribusiness. This is true in particular for the tea industry. The Government has sought, with the necessary vigor, rapid consolidation and depth of the industry that will be one of the most profitable for our farmers and our economy and therefore is expected to inject a stream growing and sustainable change in our campaigns. But we misunderstand me! There is no question, at least for now, to open new tea factories or to monopolize other fertile land for export production, while our primary goal is the national self-sufficiency.

This will be profitable first, as soon as possible, what currently exists and what has already been undertaken. It is only when the management of this vital industry will be improved it will be possible to review the prices paid to producers of tea, revision, hopefully, to be quickly achievable, because we need these cultures relate first to their producers. This is the indispensable basis, I repeat, for our self-development, which does not mean autarky, but control and selectivity in our external economic relations according to our national development goals.

Similarly, in terms of our mining industry, the Government is committed for some time to remove the barriers that stifle. It also intends to step up its action in favor of independent artisanal miners, that their important contribution to be better valued and they can derive material benefits due to them.

In its policy to promote and control its export industries, the Government will thus always at heart the major concern to provide farming families, that is to say, the essential productive forces of our country, secure income guaranteed so that their standard of living can be improved regularly. The promotion and intensification of industrial production, however, are only part of the will and commitment of the Government to increase the purchasing power in rural areas; There are other, equally important, if not more: I am talking about our food and our policy of food self-sufficiency strategy.

Here it is first in the organization upstream and downstream of the domestic food production and in particular the policy of food prices and marketing. This priority also incorporates in the imperatives of our food strategy and values ​​quintessential rural credit system, established and whose Banques Populaires are the preferred host structure. I ask again, and emphatically, the latter to make every effort to speed up their implementation in the municipalities of the country, while ensuring the profitability criteria and maintaining their collaborative nature, for a few years, our whole territory is covered by a reliable bank, effective and original, meet the aspirations of our farmers.

In this regard, the Government set up a special guarantee fund, the legal and regulatory texts of application have already been published and that it remains to be fully functional, the establishment of a secretariat permanent.Ce special guarantee fund covers all productive activities, direct and indirect, in rural areas and investments in rural areas, not just the actual agricultural activities; it is open to both farmers as artisans and small entrepreneurs. This special guarantee fund is in addition to interest rate bonus system in place, and thus predicts the best possible conditions so that in the rural and urban generalized credit system to work in the interest our producers, small, medium and large. The Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Forestry, which coordinates the Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee for rural development will make every effort for the organization priority of the downstream and upstream food production and the politics of food prices, favoring the producer, effective and operational as soon as his first term, as I defined it in the Speech Program, as "chief defender of our farmers and peasants" will ensure, "everywhere and at any time that their interests are defended in the most efficient manner." This implies that there should be no hesitation to new and bold solutions, major revisions, perhaps in depth, some current practices of certain beliefs commonly conveyed, if circumstances require for the good of the country. It serves no purpose to encourage the production if the prerequisites for this are not met, whether selected seeds, the appropriate tools, proper coaching, effective extension and participation marketing. Achieving these prerequisites is in itself a powerful engine of progress, employment and revenue generator.

Activists, Activists M.R.N.D.,

Our policy of increasing rural purchasing power is rural industrialization. Indeed, one of the major tasks of the Ministry of Industry, Mines and Crafts, responsible for the animation of the Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee for industrialization, will be to develop a real strategy of industrialization , focused on rural and regional centers, and fostering dimensions that are commensurate with our country and our means. Unfortunately, many industries promoted so far have profitability thresholds being at production levels inaccessible before long. This finding should give us lessons. If a company reaches full capacity, it will grow normally and for her to do so will require a policy promoting small and medium enterprise, small and medium industry, production cooperative, the production association, crafts and called - so improperly that matter - the informal sector: this is organic growth and this is the best way to ensure that our industrial projects are not oversized, but that they gather from the outset, the optimal conditions for an assured profitability and controlled management. Violating this law is to sin against the spirit of our self-reliance.

That's why our industrialization will be decentralized, small and medium size regionalized, and primarily valuing our resources, whatever they are, to the satisfaction of basic needs of the majority of the population. I can highlight, for example SONAFRUIT, OVIBAR especially CONFIGI, allowing thousands of people to earn a secure income, which promotes agricultural production, which largely meets local demand, while generating a surplus , if any, might even be exported.

I hope that similar approaches be explored for the processing of other food products such as tomato puree and for juice, various fruit for jelly making, juice, pasta, potatoes, peas and beans . In addition, many other opportunities for industrial processing, so mechanical and semi-mechanical, should be considered in this way, such as the manufacture of papyrus briquettes, products for livestock, the recovery of many by-products, and I pass. Indeed, if it is not possible to maintain a constant demand for our core products, by their transformation to human scale, it will not be possible to guarantee a fair price, stable and always best to produce products food crops.

Here, as elsewhere, it will appeal to the imagination, to the enthusiasm of our young people, our resources and encourage all goodwill initiatives in this area.

The speech-program 8 January 1984 stressed enough my will and intention to promote productive employment in rural areas, where the needs are most crucial and common.

I am convinced that this will contribute to the priority and real promotion of our rural areas.

Activists, Activists M.R.N.D.,

The promotion of equitable progress along the lines that I have just outlined, for all of our population is and will be the basic frame of government action. There are two others that require, in turn, particular attention and that I place under the sign of sanitation: sanitation of the public economy sector - consolidation of the private economy.

In fact, our economy is based on two -privée public and legs. both legs must to be able to walk; they must be able to advance, advance, benefiting understanding of our country; they must complement each other and they play - chacune- the role that is his.

Our parastatals are required to perform an essential function in terms of promotion and economic action and that according to the basic principles of good management. This promotional role, control, organization and orientation of certain key economic sectors that the operation of a public institution should serve as an example; it must assure its survival, that is to say, its survival on a sound and sustainable basis. Everything will be done so that these companies really contribute - and this is their first mission - to mobilize domestic savings.

Although, unfortunately, apart from some few exceptions, our parastatals, rather than helping the state and move the country towards progress have become a heavy burden on the public treasury, I trust in the promoter enthusiasm of young executives injected into the sector.

I also have confidence in the work of the "Central Accounting and Organization" whose mission is to help us clean up the management of our public institutions. This Accountant Central organization and help to train accountants and managers at all levels of parastatals and in all areas concerning their management, and to develop systematically, general and cost accounting of these institutions. At the same time, the discussion will focus on the organization and functioning of all the working context in which public companies; supervision, personnel policy, management autonomy, etc ... and will quickly make significant improvements, so that everything is in place for public companies that deserve to be, actually can have all the advantages necessary for their proper functioning in particular a real management autonomy within the framework of the objectives assigned to each of them.

I said on January 8 last, I say today: "I admit no exceptions to these principles of credibility and rigor that I have emphasized to the Government"! The final of our public companies Sanitation is a prerequisite for our credibility about the seriousness of our development policies and a requirement under the more necessary rigor than in the past of this Parliament. And in reality, this consolidation will guarantee a future.

Our philosophy of "liberalism planned" gives a prominent place to the principles of free enterprise and the development of private initiatives in a favorable context to national best interests of Rwanda. That is why our policy in this area has always been and basically be to encourage the private sector and ensure that it can grow even more. I repeat for those who at one time could express doubts about it: there is no question of wanting to strangle the private sector or to make life impossible for our businesses, or our managers entrepreneurs, national or expatriates.

I know that a number of legal provisions taken recently could give the private sector the impression of wanting to stifle them or make life unnecessarily difficult or compromising their businesses! This is not and has never been the intention of the authorities, and it never will. These arrangements have been made in good faith, the intentions that animate them are good. I pledge, on behalf of the Government, to review or to see all that, initially pretending effective and useful could be in contact with reality or with the passage of time, less effective or less useful planned.

The creation of the Interministerial Committee for coordination of economic policy will be hosted by the Ministry of Finance and Economy will be precisely the task of reviewing a number of laws on the subject to determine to what extent it would be the if necessary, to adapt them to new requirements. This interdepartmental coordination committee also has a major role consultation for everything related to our economic policies, tariff, commercial, financial and tax. More than ever, our economic policies are well aligned and integrated so that we eliminate the obstacles and abuses that we see nonetheless. But let me, about to share with you some concern which should provide solutions. It is not normal that a minority of expatriate employees may enjoy conditions infinitely higher than they would be elsewhere, simply because their income situation in Rwanda seems to confer their exorbitant benefits that nothing seems to justify a priori or professional qualifications or the function performed. This is of course a small minority of cases, but, even more visible, nevertheless constitutes a social problem and a problem of distributive justice, which has not escaped our population; she cares rightly.

I appeal to the conscience of the leaders of our companies and their boards of directors to ensure that they pay salaries remain within a reasonable framework and bearable by our country. companies must be themselves stewards of their financial means, because, as everyone knows, the world economic situation of crisis and slump can save the country Rwanda-counted among the poorest. We therefore need to take certain measures which, although unpopular in the eyes of those who seek only their own interests, however, allow our economy to somewhat limit the damage we often imported from outside and continue to worsen deterioration of our balance and reduced our foreign exchange reserves.

It is this concern that I wanted to share with all of you and especially with our economic actors in the private sector, the situation does not, however seems more critical than what the newspapers tell us about the situation in other lands . I do not hide that I am aware of some of the contradictions that exist in our economic policies, especially commercial and industrial. This is why ministries and Interministerial Coordination Committees concerned have been mandated urgently to review a number of policies to harmonize and make them as useful as possible to our national economy, especially in for the private sector: i mean, for example, our import policies. It is not acceptable that imports continue to stifle the products manufactured or constructed on site. Now, strict instructions have set the license policy, and it will be done so that the use of national production will become increasingly demanding. Indeed, how would it be possible to encourage our industries if we simultaneously encourage the import competing for the same products that we offer industries, besides the leak unnecessary currency that represents.

I can add that the current practice of entrance fees and output does not always correspond to the best interests of our economy. Again, it will be to revise our tariffs so that they always respond better to the needs of our industrialization by promoting essentially the importation of commodities and semi-finished goods for processing on up and discouraging the importation of finished products can be made locally, as well as luxury goods. Our pricing policies must become primarily a tool for development and not exclusively a tax collection means.

Our trade policy needs also to be reviewed and adapted to current needs.

The development of a flexible trade policy but effective revising our tariff system, a policy of import licenses favoring local production activities, here are some of our priorities for the private sector. The new structure of the central government set up in recent months, the launch of the Interministerial Committee for Coordination with the role of cooperation will be essential, as well as redefining and strengthening our priorities are elements that allow us to consider confidence with the future development of our private sector. The seriousness of the intentions of the Government has he not already been highlighted by the commitments made on January 8 at faster regularly clear the debts incurred by the Government with regard to the private sector?

About the execution of this order, the report from the Ministry of Finance and Economy, said that these outstanding that could not be liquidated at the end of 1983 amounted to nearly 700 million RWF. On 31 March 1984 the Treasury had already satisfied these suppliers and service providers to the extent of 620 million RWF. The bills that have been introduced subsequent to that date were also adjusted to the extent that they were accompanied by specified orders. Thus, to date, the amounts paid as arrears before 1984 totaling more than 660 million RWF. I hope as well that no invoice referred still lagging behind in the drawers of such a department manager.

Activists, Activists M.R.N.D.,

The joining of our currency to a reference basket has reduced the fluctuations of the Rwandan franc and keep inflation low, especially in rural areas.

Structural and economic recovery measures helped thwart the continued deterioration of our balance of payments and these measures will be reviewed at regular intervals in order to react to changing circumstances and new requirements arising. We will make our own thoughts as we examine all suggestions of international financial institutions so arranged for us. We are pursuing a fiscal policy characterized by balance foolproof between revenues and expenditures; we can not live beyond our means, I repeat all the time; Austerity is not an empty word, it must guide our fiscal discipline efforts.

Activists, Activists,

In this economic and commercial field, the way I want in so many others, consultation and coordination are of vital necessity. The lack of this consultation and this consultation has already caused unnecessary contradictions - for example in the fields of customs duties - the policy of the patent in that of imports, in the procedures of price approvals.

On trade, I also wish ardently pursuing training Rwandan trader -importateur - half wholesaler or retailer.

It is surprising to see foreign importers represent 70% of the total value of imports - should also see that our importers are installed in Kigali. So it is time to set measures and bank facilities, and other customs that could encourage operators to install their import trade in other prefectures of the country.

I do not tire of reminding the recommendations so that the 3rd of the 4th National Congress of the M.R.N.D. in granting credit. The distribution of this credit is still unbalanced, KIGALI - hear the capital - carving the lion's share with 90% alone. I remind traders the right to pay their taxes. But I remember at the same time the rigor and honesty that must guide the auditors. The blue suit agent becomes more and more a fear before the merchant - because he believes he can do anything, because he believes he can demand what he wants, he can tax as he hears, sometimes seeking personal interest. There are, unfortunately, dishonest taxpayers, but all traders are not thieves. So we want that we do not only focuses on technical training of staff in contact with the commercial world, but especially in their moral formation.

Activists, Activists,

The consolidation of our economy can succeed without sanitation also necessary to our municipal finances.

The consolidation of municipal finances is associated with the promotion of community development, but above all it is a requirement that flows from our rigor priorities and rearrangement of the management of public affairs. Should be able to stop, forward, grants to municipalities with the analysis shows that often it is the richest towns with the largest deficits; this is absurd. The municipal spending will be a function of municipal revenues, revenues appropriate to increase, even in resource towns themselves; Moreover, the role of the Municipal Development Fund will be redefined in order to better meet the needs while streamlining its interventions according to specific criteria.

Activists, Activists M.R.N.D.,

The themes I have chosen to address today is, as I have already said, a logical continuation of my Keynote Address. I insisted particularly on concerns socio-economic order are challenges that we must tackle firmly and therefore mobilize many efforts and reflections. As you have noticed, it is not always easy or to find appropriate solutions, as it is true that these problems are complex and that the operating field is reduced, or perform once they have quickly recognized as valid.

Far from me to dangle a bright future, while the problems we face are overwhelming! Far from me to make promises that will be hard to hold! What I have said, it is our firm intention to act concretely in a concerted way, the way I have sketched in the areas I mentioned. I never promised miracles. A spirit of realism is worth a thousand promises given in the wind.

Nevertheless, Militants, so do not let us down, despite the drought, despite the serious problems that show on the horizon, despite the adverse international environment. Rather, those economic, financial and other are invitations that we are launched to the master, overcome and thereby acquire the maturity we need and that we will always move towards a better future. Do not we say of someone, whose youth was difficult, it is much better equipped than those who did not experience difficulties to make his way in life? And we are a young country, and we are building our future!

We have the means to meet our challenges: the strength of our Movement, only framework that allows us to channel our strengths and play its full role as a unifying, facilitator and catalyst of the efforts of all of us to achieve the betterment of our country. The UMUGANDA that combines the forces of our country that the sweat of our brow we were building together what we can do individually.

To show the importance and the price that we attach to UMUGANDA we strengthened within the Administration, the forums on the UMUGANDA for its planning in close cooperation with you, always respond better to your needs and its evaluation shows us how to improve, how to make even more efficient, how to avoid waste.

And in our struggle, we are not alone. The contest friends adds to our strength. I would like to acknowledge the presence here of all the members of the Diplomatic and Consular Corps. I thank all countries and friends organizations involved in our efforts and welcomes all those who, like us, believe that it is better to join forces and cooperate rather qu'avancer piecemeal.

It is in this spirit that in terms of foreign policy, Rwanda led and still leads an active diplomacy and open. I would be remiss in this context, to ignore the situation of refugees who came to Rwanda in October 1982, a situation that remains precarious, despite efforts by the Government of Rwanda, friendly countries and humanitarian organizations .

It is high time that Uganda and Rwanda, key stakeholders, find a definitive solution to this problem. The identification surveys are now complete. On the eve of the Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa will require that this be discussed and that humanitarian agencies are helping both countries to find an appropriate solution. I launch an appeal fraternal, sincere and frank cooperation with our brothers and sisters in Uganda for the Ugandan refugees to return to the ground of their ancestors. My Government has, meanwhile, already taken all the necessary steps to settle on its territory who among these refugees were identified as Rwandan nationality. So we will show the world's eyes we are able to provide solutions to our own problems. This is my wish innermost. And this is also the meaning of our positions in the OAU for the cleavages manifesting within our organization can be overcome. Who but ourselves, can we find our unity so that we can achieve the goals defined in the Charter of the OAU!

Activists, Activists,

Our will, our concern for sound management, the climate of peace and harmony that we all set our desperate struggle for development, this is the largest investment we have been able to achieve for our country. Preserve it jealously. For us - and future generations are proud of our Rwanda and "Long live forever Our beautiful Rwanda Rwanda Rwanda Banyarwanda, Motherland Rwanda Rwanda land of peace, lakes and hills and volcanoes."

