Rwandans, Friends,

The year 1984 saw his last hours and invites us to ask ourselves, before it becomes part of the story, what it has brought us such satisfaction, as disappointment as promise. Each of us has had his share of joy, its share of sadness, joy moments, moments of discouragement. I hope the time will away the happiness for all of us, on the distress moments.

The year 1984 will beat us severely by the unexpected drought that we have hit hard - and here my thoughts go first to all families, of all places, which have suffered particularly. And this drought has accentuated the precarious conditions of a large part of our population; it caused, for many of us, a situation of great suffering and despair. I know we all, each according to his means and responsibilities, reacted strongly in front of relentless fate that is hard against us, proving to the world once again that we do not let ourselves down, whatever adversity that we build on.

But 1984 will not remain engraved in our memory only by the drought.

The year 1984 was also marked by several important events for our future. Thus, the vitality of our young democracy has received a new witness, solid, for the new inauguration of President of the Republic and the establishment of our parliament, the National Development Council, following the general election of its members.

The year 1984 also saw the consolidation of several acquired their building or their completion, and this especially in the social sphere, social facilities, schools, infrastructure, especially roads and in rural water. In this connection, let me mention the new provisions concerning the management of rural water: the effort we ask that 1985 is justified only if the quantity and water quality match the expectations of those who are involved, because, basically, this is the rationale and merits of those overriding provisions is to guarantee to the consumer, in as direct a manner as possible, and a base for his later self, usufruct of one of the most valuable assets that are: that is to say water.

These are your local authorities who are responsible fully accountable to each of you.

I would remind those who are building a school in their own hands, they do for their own children, those who build a stadium must have access thereafter. It is not normal that those who make the infrastructure, facilities, access tracks, pipelines, see other appropriate their efforts.

It is said that in the case of water supply, built as part of Umuganda or international cooperation, illegal private connections prevent people who built these water supply systems or for which they have built, access to water, their most fundamental right. These abuses that put directly and gravely into question the whole philosophy of our development policy, as explained in the principles on which our Movement must be dealt with by local officials.

The year 1984 was hard, difficult for all of us, our economic and social situation has not progressed as much as we wanted: the global economic environment was not favorable, the International Crisis having had the effect, among other things, that many of our own problems approached their climax. Teaching, he had learned, was fired: we can not live beyond our means: Rigor and austerity will be the guidelines of my term for which you have given me, in late 1983, so generously renewed your trust, trust that represents for me a fundamental commitment to work for the realization of the conditions leading to the well-being of each Rwandan to every Rwandan.

RIGOR and Austerity but also DIALOGUE TRANSPARENCY and these are the principles whose application has been designed and being implemented in all of its logical and practical consequences. It is in the sense of rigor and austerity that the new Government, set up this year, less than Ministers, reworked according to criteria of efficiency, organic and consistent distribution of sectoral mandates, while consultation, institutionalized through the Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committees, themselves designed around areas affecting the vocation of several ministries, is already beginning to bring fruit. And task sheets reflect the general mandate of each department's priorities, actions, concrete and operational deadlines. This allowed us and we will provide, through a reworded headquarters of an instrument of management and government, ever more efficient, ever more consistent; allowing us to set up a sanitation policy which must be exercised at all levels.

The sanitation policy is already beginning to be seen in practice: budgets 1984 and 1985 have already reduced some waste. Some public institutions still unfortunately few have already started to improve their performance: providing more clarity in their accounts and even increasing revenues.

It is in this sense that I requires all administrations working for the public sector becomes an eloquent showcase the ability of our country to effectively manage its business, and inspire confidence and the private sector and attracts capital and tech ones we want them to participate in the mutual interest in the development of our national economy.

Another positive element in this context is the establishment of the Central Accounting and Organization began operating in 1984.

I also want to point out the many efforts of private and mixed companies that have demonstrated their sense of responsibility and are committed to respect the spirit of the law. The dialogue remains open and my commitment, given past July 5 remains intact, is to say, to see all that is questionable in this regard.

Before turning the page of the year 1984

Activists, Activists M.R.N.D., let - I still raise 2 or 3 points that particularly pleased me or, conversely, have deeply saddened me this year.

It's always great sadness and great pain for me to have to learn that there were some among them who seemed worthy senior positions that have miserably, cowardly betrayed the trust placed in them. There would be others that abuse their privileged position by invoking the "protection" or any that engage under the cover of their budget, frivolous spending for their own pleasure. Worse - and this is already the area of ​​crime - there would be officials who demand money for signing, in their capacity as executive officer to legally contracted bills, or making plans private homes during office hours or require tip for the distribution of building permits, or who manage privately with the taxpayer who does not pay his taxes, or require rent to live in their own home, while they already received credit for its construction, or who charge their own telephone conversations on the bill of innocent customers, or arrange some customs transactions or adjudge public contracts according to their own interests that have nothing to do with those of the State. Need we recall that corrupter and corrupted are equally guilty?

I assure you for those also the time to come, where they will answer for their actions. The duty of those in charge of Justice is to discover them and punish them.

Rigor means, also, honesty in management, dedication to the job. I pay a warm and sincere tribute to all those and all those of you, who are the vast majority of our people for honesty, selflessness, dedication with which you have accomplished your tasks this year , whether humble or invested large public responsibilities or community service. They both the peasant and the peasant who sacrifice their small plot of land for the future of their children, be it zamu, the gardener, the orderly, the typist, the driver perform their task conscientiously so that they can feed their families, or the craftsman who, showing ingenuity, trying to survive honestly. Whether the official, big or small, which resists the temptation to dip into the fund, to divert public goods or the use of their paid time to other activities. You all deserve our gratitude for what you have done for the good of our country.

This year we have been able to witness an impressive development of an important economic and social sector and how promising for our country: I mean the so-called informal sector or unstructured.

I hear that over 1,000 artisans and small entrepreneurs in Kigali would be grouped in a federation, itself composed of twenty trades; I learned that their energy is great.

I want to tell them that they are preparing an important and dynamic part of our future and we will strive to support their activities to the best of our possibilities.

For some time we have a unique instrument that is the Guarantee Special Fund. I appeal to those responsible, who we ask not to make profits but to cover risks that banks alone can not bear to have heart to respond primarily to the spirit of this unique institution is this fund. When major projects from all points of view, at ground level, undertaken by farmers, parents, by craftsmen, are penalized for trivial administrative reasons and contrary to common sense, the Fund does not fulfill his role; it does not meet its primary purpose. I learn that the 160 million only $ 7 million would have been granted. This means that the Guarantee Fund Special stuck. Managers to see why and to correct that. I sincerely hope that this instrument created to stimulate investments, mainly small and medium, and this in the best interest of reviving our economy works most effectively.

Finally, to complete the balance of 1984 as I see it, I would point out that even though there were some timid initiatives in the field of small and medium agro-industry, and I welcome even more warmly we must recognize that our policy of industrialization is still far short of our expectations. I remind those who are responsible for what sector is no use dragging for so many years the same gigantic projects, whimsical person that no promoter seems interested, but that mobilize all efforts this area, while there are hundreds of real potential just waiting to be explored and implemented. A careful assessment, and concerted, these possibilities would - that as part of our integrated rural development projects, would undoubtedly quickly identify the basis of a true rural industrialization, strong and promising future .

I recently said - and I still said today: In the economic situation facing Africa, we need to know that we share responsibility and that which comes from elsewhere. An important part will surely to "Colonization" whose organizational and operating system was: focus on outside interests, and often contrary to those of our continent. There is also the part of fate. But also of ourselves, our poorly designed and oriented plans by our misplaced priorities. It is first to us - same as we should take these habits that we created that put us at ease, may - be, but we sink more and more into a deadly complex.

Let us learn to live within our means. The most serious error is that of living beyond its means. And when we speak of mistakes we will not always look far.

I have already said that importing ashtrays, candle holders, vases, while our craftsmen can not find markets for their products - also superb, it's already a mistake. When in a hotel, located in the fields of ripening beans, dinner "presidential" is composed of cans - imported beans - is - not that make fun of what we ask every day?

It's all these little facts - probably trivial in isolation - which eventually plunge us into a dependency complex. Hence import - import anything from food which we mistakenly used. Import - up stone for construction.

Let us now turn back to the year 1984 and are considering one that comes with confidence.

particularly warm wishes of, I address to all my fellow citizens, all Rwandese, all Rwandans, all activists for this new year 1985 be a year of peace, national accord, progress, that we all continue to work together, tirelessly, for the future of our children is better, so we can improve patiently, but essentially our own fate. For this I wish you courage and enthusiasm.

I express, on behalf of all the Activists and all the militants of our National Revolutionary Movement for Development, to all members of the Diplomatic and Consular Corps, their families and their fellow citizens, as well as respected heads of State and Government that they represent the Republic of Rwanda, my best wishes and warmest of peace, happiness and prosperity for 1985.

May this year be truly for our peoples and for all of us in our lives and in our state relations, a year of harmony, economic and social justice and progress and that many problems, complex and often overwhelming to which each today our country, according to its own situation, faces, are a beginning of lasting solution.

I include in my greeting all cooperating, all cooperating, all volunteers, and all volunteers, all our religious sisters and all our missionaries and all our foreign friends who, either on a private level, either in terms Official, or within organizations Nongovernmental, working in our country for the good of its people. And to you, I will address a special salvation, because we all know how much your work and your work is inspired by the same desire to work for Rwanda still better equipped, more and more able to provide for everyone the opportunity to develop harmoniously and to earn a living in order to properly meet the needs both material and spiritual.

A message of friendship and fraternal particularly warm greeting, I would also speak to the people and their distinguished and respected heads of state of the countries surrounding Rwanda, for that 1985 is further proof of the regional essential to our survival deal to all of us that our cooperation continues to grow in our best interests, and that our occasional problems find satisfactory answers for everyone, showing to the world that we are able to provide solutions to our own problems.

The year 1985 was declared "INTERNATIONAL YEAR OF YOUTH" by the Nations General Assembly - United to its 34th session in 1979.

The objectives of the world's youth for this year are centered on three themes namely: participation, development and peace.

The goals of the international bodies and correspond to the ideals of M.R.N.D., whose motto is Unity, Peace and Development.

With particular Youth of Rwanda, I would recall that these problems have never stopped worrying about our country. My Government even cares more that this category of the population accounts for over 50% of Rwandans and is facing acute problems of training, supervision and production. So 1985 should - it give us the opportunity to assess the work already done to meet the priority needs of young people and give new impetus to the programs of their promotion to engage them with more vigor to efforts economic, social and cultural country.

Priority will always be given to agro -pastorales activities. For this purpose, the Training Centers of Youth Groups the socio - economic needs of youth, youth movements and leaders of youth must devote themselves more intensely to agricultural production, forestry and livestock. But the promotion of craft activities also remains an urgent need.

To assess what has been done so far in these areas as well as the contribution of youth in the activities of conservation and enhancement of our cultural and artistic heritage, competitions are planned in the course of 1985. We believe that most of these competitions and other events celebrating the International Year of youth, all levels of government and all the socio - professional should focus in their activities, integration of young people in the nation-building to strengthen their part in increasing the production of goods and services, socio - cultural.

I especially invite parents, local authorities, youth organizations and various technical services interested in production activities, culture and sports to play their full role of education, administrative supervision and technical registering their shares in the long-term prospects for the fight against under - employment, illiteracy and crime.

Today's youth are tomorrow's leaders.

The program of activities to be implemented will be assessed in their effects on output, employment and improved living conditions.

Militants, supporters, sympathizers,

Our 1985 will be under the slogan of "FOOD PRODUCTION AND MANURE." The subject of food production which was already highlighted in 1974 itself is so vast and so vital for our country, we decided to highlight this year one of its most important components, namely, soil fertilization, without which we can not maintain or, a fortiori, increase our food production.

Crop rotation consisting in practice several crops on a cycle of several years, or grow intercropping to fertilize the soil, or even once per fallow where farmers could still move when the fertility of their fields began to decline this rotation - there, the peasant has often practiced and still practice. But we must consider today the depletion of our land, scarcity which requires production to be highly intensified for her to meet our ever increasing needs.

I said recently that we must engage without delay in a new agricultural intensification, synonymous of an agricultural revolution in farming methods practiced by most of our farmers. "

The theme this year will thus begin this agricultural intensification, not only by raising our farmers to new methods of crop rotation from their soil, but also to identify the best crops that can be produced in association.

I'm not an agronomist, but it is commonly known that a better combination of cultures, a suitable combination, can reduce the incidence of certain diseases and certain invasions of harmful insects, which also reduces the need insecticides and herbicides. The leitmotif of the manure will also inspire our research programs and experiments to intensify the study of relationship power / energy, the study of scientific methods that preserve soil fertility with natural methods such as composting, which can be done in any operating or manure used in connection with animal husbandry, even little while, pets, waste of all kinds and other methods yet that experts are sure to tell us. This will also, for our agricultural technicians the opportunity to develop a strategy for the use of chemical fertilizers, a strategy that will ensure the requirements of the protection of our environment.

We certainly can not do without chemical fertilizers, but we already know that the misuse of chemicals can result in imprisonment or sterilization of soil and contamination of the products they supply, causing water pollution and cause health hazards peasants, agricultural workers, and for consumers.

It will therefore proceed in a cautious manner, in a prudent manner, so that we can learn what we wisely will replenish declining soil, promote increased fertility and without our agriculture falls in an unhealthy dependence on chemical fertilizers. It is therefore to proceed with maximum caution in terms of chemical fertilizers, while the use of all other methods of fertilization will know from this year a strong expansion through effective outreach and dialogue Standing with farmers. I run to farmers - farmers an urgent appeal to strengthen their activities in this direction, drawing on experiences of progressive farmers or in the many rural development projects covering our territory. There is therefore a task that concerns all actors of our economy. For now, we need a judicious use plan fertilizers that we have been proposed within the framework of international cooperation programs.

Two major deadlines await us this year:

reviving the economy and preparing our next plan.

As for the economic recovery and the consolidation of our economy, I in my speech on 5 July, already presented the broad parameters, whether the rapid promotion of rural purchasing power the revision of our tariff and tax policies and other legal requirements, trade policy, rural industrialization, credit, encouraging the sector said unstructured, communal development, etc ..,

Meanwhile, specific instructions, in other spécifiaient and stared priorities. I will not be back so more. We now expect that the ministries and departments concerned now make every effort, as diligently and as conscientiously as possible to give our economy a more acceptable cruising speed.

This economic stimulus program, have - I spe acquirable, fits into our broader efforts to restructure our economy, to readjust our true structural priorities. In addition, more than in the past, the Government will make a greater effort in the field of pedagogy, that is to say the most explicit statement of the consistency of government policy in this area.

Let - me therefore to present briefly Militants, supporters, sympathizers, the approach that we intend to follow the development of our next plan. Inspired by our past experience, this experience has convinced us that we have today something different, something more useful, more concrete, and that really does us a service not only to classify our problems and integrate them into a coherent concept and operation, but above all fully operational, to the measure of our possibilities.

There is no point of having a plan, full of well-meaning theories, certainly, but ineffective and often hermetic, as perfect and consistent may be its appearance, it does not correspond to our means to prepare for the design, nor, above our means of executing it, realize it!

If we are serious with our development policy with the principles of rigor and austerity that inspire and priorities we have identified, we will need, obviously, a planning tool that is available to us, which before anything else, priority, taking account of our own, and only then, what we really believe possible and likely, such support may come from outside. In this sense, the planning process seems to be so much more useful, more educational, more immediately useful than the "result", that is to say, a final document, regardless of the number of pages that contains.

Meets the concepts that inspired all the reforms carried out since 1973, political reform, educational, administrative, using the instrument of the major strategies highlighted in my speech - January 8, 1984 the Program for the mandate of each ministry, our next plan will include as many strategists as we can develop is - to - say, are concerned Ministries are able to produce, carefully following the instructions that realism e just stated.

If we only have 5 fully operational strategies, harmonized, well! we will have a lan that count 5, but will have the advantage of having been designed in all their concrete implications, financial commitments, their operationalization is in the municipalities, prefectures, or in objectives.

If we are able to develop more, better, but I expect that each department has at least one, at least that would justify its reason for being. As I said on the 8th January, the Minister of Planning will have a double task he exercised with full authority, namely:

help, inspire, support, stimulate, through its experience and global vision acquired, the various departments involved in the development of their strategies; but never, it will replace the latter; ensure the sharing, synthesis and harmonization of these strategies, develop positions arbitrage, program intersectoral investment and financial commitments to enhance the regional and local level.

It goes without saying that to be realistic and close to the realities of the country and its people, wide consultation is imposera.11 need every town feel concerned with the preparation of the Plan, as concerned with its later execution. The greatest importance will also be given to the updating of our communal development strategy.

Finally, if we maintain for now, the five-year framework of the Plan, that's simply a matter of convenience, and planning some macro variables - economic, as investment needs, budget commitments, which the importance for our statistical system to be more up to the requirements. But it would be illusory to believe that the various strategies can submit to a schedule as demanding.

What is needed is that the strategic goals whose achievement can precisely vary over time, are fully operational every year, concrete because rooted in everyday reality and truly dependent on our resources and our possibilities and they can be evaluated easily, regularly and, where necessary, revised and adjusted. It would be equally superfluous to reinvent strategies on which we all agreed, namely, food strategy and the energy strategy; it is now to the deepening of the reality still more in terms of policy, in terms of programs and projects, and tailor them to the specificity of our regions and our communities.

I ask the Ministry of Planning and the CIC in plan and cooperation, he leads, deepen until late February the methodology regarding strategies to develop, to present a detailed timetable for their development, and a possible outline of the presentation of a final document.

I would not be complete if, on this occasion, I did not thank, sincerely, countries and friends organizations that we support each in our efforts.

We appreciate all the more their actions that they, despite a sluggish international economic climate, maintained and sometimes increased their commitments vis-à-vis our country.

The contacts we have had with them this year in the institutional framework of the Mixed Commissions have allowed us to see the will of cooperation that animates beyond the difficulties of all kinds. The different strategies that Rwanda has data, such as food strategy, energy strategy, that the study of industrialization and those that will be prepared within the next plan is, and will, we believe a field of intervention perfect for our partners. Since they are valuable indications for private investors, domestic and foreign whom we reiterate our encouragement.

The seriousness with which we try to proceed and progress should be the guarantor for that international cooperation is not in vain, but that it can find the best fit docking framework of cooperative efforts that we are granted.

So by our own efforts and the support of our friends, we can accelerate our march towards progress and consolidate the gains of the Revolution started in 1973. Because this revolution is fundamental. Revolution by action and not by the verb.

For me revolution meaning, not stormy slogans taken from imported ingredients. But Revolution mean for me "internal revolt". Revolt at the many obstacles that hinder us so they do not stop us nor make us abandon the path of development.

Revolt to the distance from us to the sea leads us to isolation but pushes us towards research, always challenging the policy of good neighborliness. This requires enormous efforts to maintain gains and expand our offerings of good will. It will surely be heard and believed, that goodwill.

Revolt for our farm land to feed us and not to the fertility of others. For our young -God many thank you! - have now and in the future, always eating and always getting better. And they always praise us for having cared for their fate. That the Revolution - That of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development. Revolutionary action and deed. Rwandans,

I present to you once again, my best wishes for your health and that of your children. Greetings of progress understood for all Rwandans.

My wishes for happiness and prosperity for all foreign friends who live with us:

The Diplomats, the Cooperators, the Religious, Volunteers and all those who are currently visiting Rwanda.

To all Happy New Year 1985.

