Militants of Mr. R.N.D., supporters, sympathizers, Ladies and Gentlemen,

July 5 is each year an opportunity for our country to celebrate three important events. Today we are in a festive atmosphere for the 23th anniversary of our nation's independence, the 12th anniversary of the advent of the second republic and the 1Oème anniversary of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development Foundation (M.R.N.D.).

It is with great excitement that we welcome you today in this July 5, 1985, we celebrate, in simplicity, but with dignity, and with great joy, the ten years of existence our National Revolutionary Movement for Development.

This anniversary is particularly significant for us Rwandans: it takes, beyond the symbolic ten-year figure, importance and value that can understand and feel that those who know the price we committed to the implementation of a structure and a base of political organization for our country, Rwanda, namely:

structure and political organization of the country that meet its aspirations, his genius, his wisdom; structure and political organization also that best reflect the principles of responsible democracy whose foundation is rooted deep in our culture, our civilization; structure and political organization that allow finally to lay the foundations on which our development, Rwanda's development, understanding of our people progress, always better guarantee satisfaction of our basic needs, material and spiritual, all of us can take root and flourish.

Rwandans,

Our Movement is our business to all of us. You prove it every day, we prove it every day since July 5, 1975, the date of his birth.

The National Revolutionary Movement for Development, you wanted a gathering of movement, assembly for each Rwandan to Rwanda each; without distinction of ethnicity, religion, sex, age, origin: there is no exclusion from anyone, nor, a fortiori, no membership process. We are all part of the same title under our belonging to Rwanda.

Need I remind the break at the beginning of 1973, political institutions, insecurity across the country, Peace and National Unity severely compromised by sterile struggles, and economy of the countries involved on a slope without end?

The Rwandan Army felt it his duty to take charge of the destiny of the country. In such a serious situation, she could only take responsibility to bring peace and unity to safeguard our assets both political and socio-economic, and launch the country on the path of development. The 2nd Republic was born and under the sign of Peace, Unity and Development.

There are twelve years old.

Young Activists, Youth Activists,

you who make up today more than half of our people; you who now enter into enjoyment of the right to vote, of all the rights guaranteed by our Constitution; you who it was 10 years ago, were still children, to you, we say;

to those who it was ten years gave so massively their voices to approve the creation of our movement, we recall: the National Revolutionary Movement for Development was designed to give expression to the legitimate aspirations of the people of Rwanda, who wanted - a political in which all would enjoy a freedom of expression, an open reception frame at all, a forum where all can express themselves freely, that is to say a political party that would bury our sterile internal divisions, which would institutionalize the dialogue in the unit, the debate ideas without acrimony, debate converging towards what is the priority of priorities

fair promotion of progress by all shared, developing understanding for all members of our society - This is why our National Revolutionary Movement for Development was created; acceptance by the Rwandan people seemed to us the evidence that we had hit the mark, as the promise of a future that would value the past in what was more exciting, a future that would also be modeled by all the forces of the country, meeting our Movement, according to our national development imperatives to which would now reach all our efforts.

Activists Activists,

Ten years later, today, where are we? Which brought us the first ten years of development under the principles of our movement?

The first and, basically, the most important achievements because it really affects all others, is the recovery, deepening, enrichment, radiation National Peace, National Unity of national understanding, peaceful dialogue among our people through our Movement.

Is it not a splendid victory on ourselves, on some dark sides of our shared past we intimately hope we strongly believe, have won definitively.

Our National Movement is it not to him that we owe this victory, victory that was essential to be able to devote ourselves entirely to the struggle for the development of the whole of Rwanda. It is this victory - it is our belief and we know that you all share - that is our jewel acquired through Movement, the example we can show the world as a symbol of our RWANDA, as evidence of our unwavering willingness to participate as fraternal as possible, as frankly as possible to the building of a regional agreement where divisions have disappeared in favor of healthy competition for development understanding of our peoples.

A climate of peace and unity in diversity, having thus been established through the foundation of the MRND, it was possible to proceed smoothly and organically, according to the different national Congress in setting up bodies our Movement, either at central level or at the level of prefectures, cities, sectors, cells, either in terms of its actual activities and resources mobilization.

With our Movement, it was also possible for us to consider, and realize according to our promises, the return to democratic and parliamentary institutions, and that within the period that we were set a target.

Activists, Activists,

The Constitution of the Republic of Rwanda has been adopted by referendum on December 17, 1978.

A week later, you have to elect the President of the Republic.

In December 1981, you elected freely among all the candidates presented, those that you believe most worthy to represent you as Members of the National Development Council, leC.N.D. our Parliament.

All this happened in quiet, in peace, knowing that we were all of the challenge this presented for the future of our country. All this was also the work of our M.R.N.D. your work. Militants; it will remain one of the best legacies that the first decade of M.R.N.D. leave to our children.

Young Activists, Youth Activists,

We address you in particular, today, on this solemn day, not only because 1985 is devoted to you internationally, but mostly because our future depends on you. It is you, our future. It's up to you to learn. It's still up to you to live and deepen the principles that inspire our National Revolutionary Movement for Development, safeguarding past achievements, always valuing more, making you worthy of the sacrifices and beliefs of your elders, your parents, who put all their efforts to build our movement, to build peace and national concord, to give our movement a structure, an organization, means that ensure its democratic functioning, fulfillment and the participation of all of us to build our country, the progress of our people.

Activists, Activists,

This exceptional time of national peace, the past decade has allowed us to take some important steps, decisive, to the realization of the principles of our movement towards sustainable progress, guaranteeing future.

Should we close our ears when our friends, friends of Rwanda, keep telling us that, in their eyes, the way that Rwanda has come since 10 years they seem remarkable, incredible, because they have not forgotten what our situation was there ten years ago, where we left it ten years ago.

And we, have we forgotten? Have we forgotten what .était the state of Rwanda 10 years ago? The absence of our infrastructure? The fragility of our production system? The low rate of schooling? The precariousness of our habitat? Difficult access to almost non-existent utilities? The massive lack of Rwandans among economic operators working in our country? The weakness of our health care system? The deficiencies of the coverage of our basic material needs? Endemic poverty? The accumulation of our modest capital of our wealth? The remoteness and isolation were ours? International cooperation was still in its infancy? Have we forgotten?

It would be tempting, Militants, we stop today arithmetic balance sheet accounting, all that has been accomplished since the inception of our movement.

It is not our purpose today want to prove that we have made clear progress, we have achieved performance of which we can justifiably be proud - they are indeed the work of each of us - or you name ies many areas in which the Movement was active in which we will be allowed to move forward.

No, this is not who we're going to do today. The Central Committee has prepared a detailed document and encrypted on the record of the past 10 years. Not so much to prove we progress - and we could prove, if we do not already intimately were convinced! - but a balance sheet that will allow us to better measure what remains to be done, the road ahead, the obstacles that the mark, new efforts to undertake improvements, innovations to consider adjustments to be made.

Today, we prefer to use the opportunity presented to us to reflect, as a balance sheet, on some of the great constants of our development policy, on certain of our convictions, and measure at one of our expectations, hopes, of what has been achieved, or what has not been achieved since the National Revolutionary Movement for development helped to channel our concerted efforts toward this goal is development of Rwanda thanks to the principles and ideals to which we have adhered.

Activists, Activists,

The reflection to which we invite you today, will only cover five areas, but are essential to better understand the path, but also to guide us in the way forward.

These five areas are like five poles of our action are:

the field of justice and the rule of law; the field of economic policy; the area demographics and food; socio-ecological area; the field of organization of the living forces of our country.

These five areas, these five concerns are at the bottom of our global development policy parameters. They are a set of elements, indivisible, interrelated because conceptually as well as operationally. They form as a coherent fabric, through policies inspired by the principles and ideals of our movement.

Thus, a functioning judicial system, and promoting the rule of law, are the first essential component of any self-respecting country, which wants to modernize, who wants to create the conditions for the harmonious development, respectful, fair these citizens.

Our ambition is to make Rwanda a genuine rule of law. Our constant concern for any time has been to promote justice in each department of us, for all of us to live in peace, can enjoy all the guarantees of their rights, which in turn strengthens compliance with these duties to others, to the community, to the state.

Our constant concern was also to strengthen judicial institutions are those of a state of law, that is to say, a state where the laws are respected, where the individual enjoyment of all rights where civil liberties are guaranteed, where the security of all citizens is assured, day and night.

In this area of ​​justice, undeniable progress, Militants, was completed in ten years. Judicial reform since 1982 business has adapted our legislation to the actual defense of the true interests of individuals both public and private sector. Many laws have been introduced in 10 years, many reforms have emerged. We all know. other

Breathing new anime responsible for justice: changes are noticeable in our legal system in line with the accelerated processing of applications and in the execution of judgments. We encourage efforts in this vital sector for our country. At every opportunity we have emphasized the supervision of the judiciary. The fight against crime and against the misuse of public property must continue. Improving our prisons should, despite our limited resources, demonstrate our commitment to the respect of every human person. Justice is the thermometer of the degree of development of a country.

But, despite this significant progress, it is still not enough; it's not enough. Many burrs still taint our judicial system. Many magistrates working attitudes, how to perform their tasks that do not yet meet the requirements of justice served honorably, objective, applying the more scrupulously as possible our laws because they prefer to follow their own interests or those of their friends, clients. Lots of misunderstanding and ignorance still president in how justice is administered. These deficiencies do not escape the attention of our citizens and our foreign friends; They violate our honor and our ideals and principles of our movement.

We lack, as you know. Militants, judicial staff sufficient in number and qualifications; we will spare no effort to make every day a little more, our highest functioning court system more honorable, more effective.

Rule of law also means transparency of the system of power, banishing arbitrariness, access to remedies, guarantee of fundamental rights, human rights.

We are told that for many of our compatriots, some central services would become the symbol of the abuse of power, arbitrary, where the agent would have any means to satisfy his personal revenge or those of his friends and acquaintances .

Therefore it is necessary to recall the duty of every Rwandan to obey the law and more to those who daily are responsible for enforcing.

The Justice Department must pay particular attention to this as justice law be scrupulously respected. We will particularly help.

Some still believe, Militants, that to get a due service, an answer to a given problem, to be engaged in such a position, it loophole through an intermediary, by a "personality" influential, even if they are formed in the procedure. Some apparently, nothing could be achieved without going through this unusual way, whether in public administration, state institutions, corporations and even private homes. Such a practice, the weeds in the wheat field, is in flagrant opposition to the principles of our movement.

We strongly condemn this bad habit. It would be detrimental to the future of our country if a manager or any agent could not give a result, as soon as possible to requests made to it, if the required formalities have been completed, without flaw involving a third person.

And we appeal urgently to all those who believe that such attitudes can give them benefits, and those which are the subject of such interventions, not to give in to these venal behaviors to respect due process, of apply what the law provides, not to deprive those in their rights to what is due them under the pretext of some small opportunistic benefits.

This is our dignity to all, the reputation of our country, Rwanda, the realization of our basic aspirations for a just justice for all.

We want a healthy administration, dynamic, an administration that does appesante point of harassment, often corrupt, but that assists, which stimulates and produces.

Moreover, it. need everyone to understand that not all problems can not be solved only by the President of the Republic. We have set up institutions that work and have their competence. The President of the Republic to his skills that he gives the Constitution, it must sometimes decide when needed but not all requests are to be decided by him. He can not override the decision taken regularly by other relevant authorities, unless the law allows him to make the decision of last resort. You have to trust in our institutions and to report if necessary what does not. Whether one understands us, We have sworn and will never betray our oath to serve all Rwandans. But the relevant bodies set up in our country in turn must fully assume their responsibilities.

Activists, Activists,

If we insisted strongly on this critical area for our development is justice for everyone, what the advent of a genuine rule of law is not only that we know how this area you care about how it can be a great handicap for our development, if poorly managed, but also and especially because today we are addressing in this 10th anniversary of the birth of our Movement National especially our youth, our youth, youth Militants, to show them that we have come a long way, full of promise for the future, and nothing will hold us to do everything possible for our state in law into this living reality, strong, we have been encouraging for our young people, who are our future, do not follow the bad example, do not adopt bad habits, but they have confidence in our people, in its d irigeants in its movement,

Militants,

A second major area of ​​reflection that we propose today, by way of the ten years of our Bilan National Movement, is one of our economic development policy.

If the living reality of the rule of law is a prerequisite for our engagement efforts to national development, the establishment of an economic development policy understood in turn affects the material and spiritual progress of a people .

What was, what is the basis of our economic development policy as we continued, thanks to the principles and ideals of our National Revolutionary Movement for Development?

This economic policy of ours. Militants, is that of a self-development we want real, endogenous, that is to say, the essence of which has its source in the forces of the country, in our culture, in the valuation our own resources so that we can meet with our means, our basic needs, so we can physically survive through our domestic food production, so we can look forward with confidence because we have been able to prove that our country, our beautiful Rwanda, holds riches that will allow her daughters and her son to find a reason for being and prosper ever.

This economic policy of self-development must ensure we also some economic and financial independence, essential Militants in reality the understood political independence.

As we have already said many times, our economic policy of a self-development requires understanding:

approaches that are healthy, ecologically, that is to say, that does not spoil our ecological heritage, so that we do not live in the capital of our resources, but the flows they generate and it is precisely to increase; approaches that are desirable, socially, that is to say, that actually contribute to improving the standard of living of all our people, not just a small part of it, and assuring always easier access all of us to ever greater service coverage, whether school facilities, health, administrative, or access to energy, to the nutrition, production and consumer goods; approaches that are viable economically, that is to say, that meet the criteria of good economic management of our resources, especially on the macroeconomic level, that optimize the allocation of resources according the establishment of the essential conditions for the promotion and expansion of national productive activities to meet national needs.

Since the founding of our National Revolutionary Movement for Development, real progress has been made on the economic front. All of us agree that the economic situation has improved for 10 years, our facilities have expanded at a significant rate, our revenues have increased, we have ever more access to all sorts of goods that ten years ago most of us do not even know.

Militants,

This is not to list everything that has been achieved economically for 10 years, thanks to the principles underlying our economic development policy.

May we be permitted only to quickly highlight some fundamental aspects that we believe in our own opinion on the recorded economic development for ten years.

There are, first, that the distribution of income, that is to say the wealth created, continues to remain more or less equal, despite the strong economic growth that fact that very often the income distribution favors those already better off. We are all aware that the vast majority of our people still live close to the poverty line, but we made a step forward. Our commitment to do everything, so that the fruits of growth are distributed as egalitarian as possible, whole rest, according to the principles of M.R.N.D.

Then, the change in value in the creation of national wealth intervened in favor of the product processing, thus industrializing activities reflected a decisive beginning to a kind of inward-looking industrialization, endogenous, in which the growth found of all small businesses, those of our craftsmen take an ever more important, because it is on the promotion and encouragement of harmonious small and medium entrepreneurs who are many, all over the country, some rest ever more essential to our future economic progress. The evolution that we have recorded in this area also reflects a significant acceleration in the growth rate of domestic investment and gross domestic savings, which is promising for the future.

In addition, two other factors have always been among our highest priorities, largely condition the success of our approach to economic development of Rwanda; they are, at least, two characteristic features, if not original.

The first factor is the establishment and strengthening of a system of distribution of essential goods, throughout our territory, practicing the same price everywhere.

What it basically it serve to earn more money, if the farmer is not guaranteed to find the goods that he needs beside him, at fair prices, and that is done remove added value it created by traders little scrupu them-I, or it serves to enrich the cities?

These are the TRAFIPRO Cooperative long and more recently OPROVIA which are our two main instruments of prices stabilizing in Rwanda and distributors of basic goods. By allowing everyone to have access to basic goods they need and can get through his work, their action joined the permanent concern of the Movement and the Government to ensure that economic progress is distributed to as homogeneously as possible for everyone to benefit fully.

We hope that the crucial deadlines before which are today the two organizations are addressed with courage, foresight and rigor so that they can quickly meet the demands of tomorrow, with renewed vigor, confident that they are huge expectations placed them.

The second factor relates to the establishment and strengthening of a privileged instrument for the truly endogenous accumulation of our wealth especially in rural environment said, namely, an instrument of deposits and loans, allowing our farmers better manage their economies, but especially to have access to credit that is indispensable to improve, according to their needs, feelings, activities, and benefit more from their main producer efforts of our country.

The significant expansion of the Banque Populaire has already enabled a large part of our population to benefit from this remarkable accumulation instrument. Other banks also have started to decentralize their activities. We can only congratulate them and encourage them.

What is essential is to prevent financial institutions operating in rural areas encourage skimming savings realized by farmers to Dramer to the large cities. That's exactly encourage the use for productive purposes in national savings, where it was done, we created the Fund Guarantee Special, since reorganized following the recorded operating deficiencies for which new managers have been appointed. This Fund shall be iron throws for the promotion of all production activities, primarily those of small, small and medium sizes, ensuring financial institutions - which are responsible for the quality of loans - Possible risk of their commitments.

Today we are launching an urgent appeal to the new leaders of the Guarantee Special Fund, for they interpret the relevant texts in all their latitude, and this in the spirit in which they were written, and to exercise of innovation, so that the warranty Special Fund boosts with all the vigor required the domestic activities of any kind, but small and medium sizes.

An egalitarian basic goods distribution system and democratized credit system - all over our territory - these two important components of our concept of a well understood self development.

Militants,

Finally, there is this essential aspect of our economic development policy is the macroeconomic management of our economic heritage, be they budgetary policies, monetary policy, the policy of the balance of payments. We can not live beyond our means. Macroeconomic management must respond to this truth that we deem fundamental.

In our vision, among these macroeconomic balances to safeguard the monetary equilibrium is particularly crucial.

We managed to avoid deficit financing, policy that would be entirely made inoperative in a country like Rwanda. We would have long since exhausted our reserves, we will know today galloping inflation, we would have insurmountable difficulties in the repayment of our debts.

True independence of a people, the ultimate guarantor of his dignity, is to depend ultimately on their own decisions. That's why we wanted to give our country a margin of sufficient financial and economic independence in order to have sufficient financial resources and large reserves of foreign exchange for the long-term commitments that undermine our freedom and our future generations that bind be as light as possible.

We were helped there, we will always be helped by the advice given to us by so many friendly countries and by many international institutions.

One of the balances that is threatened, it is that the current account: the rapid increase in imports, while our exports are stagnant, may put into question the achievements of the last decade. We began by creating the conditions for establishing a genuine management of imports, that is to say, to set up, intelligently, rationally instruments to manage the evolution of imports, and thus our scarce foreign exchange, and that a flexible control of import trade and in the context of a real planned liberalism, and without causing damage to areas of production and trade without disrupting essential.

Today we call on all officials concerned by this issue to ensure the maximum attention that the evolution of imports is controlled in the sense sketched, and as soon as possible.

This import control policy is part of a broader context which is that of sanitation and Recovery Plan we announced major igneous I and priorities in our latest programs speech. In a few months we will have. Militants, such a plan, concerted, coherent, mature, integrated, reflecting the intimate convictions of those who will apply it. This remediation plan and stimulus will serve as a major reference for our economic development policies for the coming years. If it took a long time to be developed is that important, it is a work of intense consultation and the result of a general accession process may be too long for some our partners, which is essential if the Plan is to succeed.

There would be many things to say about our economic development policy in the light of the first ten years of experience of our National Revolutionary Movement for Development. The main lesson, maybe we can draw is that social change, structural transformation of the economy can not do that using integrated strategies, operational, concerted policies, courageous visions , prospective, a mobilizing action at all levels of an intense dialogue with our farmers, our farmers, it must be remembered, create most of our national wealth. We believe that this idea has caught on and it will be possible for us to consider the development and implementation of these policies, these strategies with confidence.

Militants,

The third major area of ​​reflection that inspires the 10th anniversary of our political movement, it is that of the particular problems of our country, namely, maintaining the balance between the increase of our population and food supply.

For ten years, the growth of our population was very important, so much so that the population density in Rwanda is now the largest in all of Africa. The density of the population that arable land become increasingly scarce. This situation is compounded by our strong scattered settlements which makes difficult any groups of people. A quantitative scarcity of land is added prospects even bleaker qualitatively because the mountainous terrain of our country promotes soil degradation by erosion. Today Militants, the situation has become worrying. Our future will be conditioned by how we manage to reconcile the control of population growth and increased food availability.

One of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development paris was aware, and make us aware of this difficult problem, but the solution must be considered in all its aspects. Our policy advocated by the Movement, was first put up this review and sensible instrument, the National Office of Population whose action raised awareness all Rwandan demographic problem and offer advice and methods.

Meanwhile, we tried, with some success, it must be admitted, to act simultaneously and improving living standards, especially in rural areas, and education and motivation in the field, while putting increasingly available to interested parties the means that would allow them to proceed, according to their beliefs, their convictions, their rate of awareness in determining the number of children desired. As you know, this is one reason why we insist by all means on this priority that is the imperative increase in rural purchasing power, because control of our population depends on it.

The future of Rwanda, we believe, will prove the correctness of that assessment, confirm the approach taken in the matter by our National Revolutionary Movement for Development. Meanwhile, we continue to work with all our means on both counts. We should not hesitate to engage all our resources, spiritual, religious and other serving an appropriate demographic solution for our country.

In this sector, we sincerely hope more cooperation and more coordination between all departments and agencies concerned with the socio-demographic problems.

The other side of the equation is to increase agricultural production, especially food. The last ten years have experienced, globally speaking, an increase in our food production slightly stronger than our growth. If not for the drought last year, we would have achieved a relatively comfortable self-sufficiency.

We have set up a food strategy that will enable us to channel all our efforts to achieve this major objective which is the self-sufficiency of our country food self-sufficiency as we have defined it before the African Heads of State at the Summit Franco-African of the month of December 1984.

To mark the 10th anniversary of M.R.N.D. we renew our solemn commitment to our food strategy so that it becomes the true frame of e our development efforts.

We still have many important potential to implement and operate. We only mention those of Mutara and those of the NYABARONGO valley besides the intensification of farming methods and even a fundamental review of some of them.

The population is fluently balance - supply is within our reach if we all commit to contribute within our means and to devote our best efforts. It is in our survival and that of our children.

We want to address a specific problem here of vital interest for our country, it is rural development projects.

During the last ten years, our partners have helped us achieve a number of rural development projects. Today, more than thirty such projects cover 115 municipalities of the country.

All these projects have the same objective: the well-being of farmers and Rwandan farmers and their children. Very often, however, it turns out that a project to another, the approach and methods differ, the studies are not realistic enough or they do not lead to an operational project document that recurring expenses are not calculated or are such that at the end of the project who must take over or may be lacking the support. It probably comes to the relevant departments to harmonize the concepts, methods and practices of many developing studies to achieve project documents that largely ensure their success.

On the other hand, Rwanda can not go into debt vis-à-vis the outside to finance rural development projects with uncertain profitability, ill-defined, expensive currency but unable to generate foreign exchange needed to repay the debt and that add nothing to the welfare of the peasant. Rwanda can not continue to serve as a laboratory to contradictory attempts made each time by international experts as the panacea for rural development.

To create the conditions of a developing self-sustaining recommended by our movement, we must now worry about the cumulative impact of all of our development projects and the degree of utilization of the factors available in our

We have complete control of recurrent costs, that is to say, operating expenditure and maintenance after project. Care should be taken when designing our projects that selected projects do not weigh too heavy a burden on budget expenditures of the state or on the future of our children.

Now, in the choice of our projects and in negotiations with donors, priority will be given to projects that promise, in their operating phase, to be financially self-sufficient or preferably may surpluses. We invite our donors to pay more attention to the budgetary consequences of projects prepared by them both during their investment period during their period of operation.

Rural development projects they are called global, integrated or grouped, should not be an additional burden for the state and leaving for farmers and for farmers but a way for them to increase their welfare, economic and cultural.

Militants,

Another theme suggested by the 10th anniversary of M.R.N.D. it is the socio-ecological field, by this we mean the balance that must exist between one side improving the standard of living of our population, and the protection of our resource base. It would not take that one to the detriment of the other.

We chose a style of development which must ensure the social advancement of all, without endangering our ecological heritage. Social progress achieved in ten years has enabled us to move forward in terms of teaching when the reorganization of primary education, the IIBA, secondary education, set up in recent years allows our system school run according to the dictates tried to match the requirements of the training needs of our society. Huge efforts have been made for the construction of classrooms, which allowed the doubling of students between 1974 and 1984. This is an encouraging result, it is also the result of the active participation of the population to the efforts of government, through the UMUGANDA and international cooperation.

Following the recommendations made during the III and IV Congress M.R.N.D., the Government has developed a program to build new secondary schools to allow to rapidly increase the number of our children can move from primary to secondary. This is often the greatest desire of our parents to see their children move from primary to secondary. The program provided by the Government is running. The massive expansion of the externship in turn is an inevitable prerequisite, and the most desirable background, so we can sustainably increase our number of children enrolled in secondary school. The introduction of the externship result among other things a schedule change for the children to be part or all of their homework at school before returning home. them. We urge everyone who is concerned to understand that the exorbitant costs of the boarding would never allow us to increase enrollment in secondary school.

The education reform requires significant expenditure - infrastructure, equipment workshops, supplying teaching material ... So we must recall the recommendation not to freeze us in stagnant positions but that discussions are still maintained order continue to adapt our policies to our means and always look for ways to reduce costs. In praising the initiatives already taken, we renew our call to all those who can to they help the Government to establish other schools, at all levels, to help our children prepare, always more at role that awaits them.

Another social acquis is improving our habitat, which we devote our attention. Progress in this area is undeniable. Much has already been achieved; more things still need to be made so that every Rwandan family has a day of habitat worthy of the name.

In the medium term, however, should be considered as common themselves become the land developers, and whether those responsible for sectors themselves, in constant consultation with their constituencies, design their new way of living, taking among other things, the maximum solutions, resources and local materials.

Given the needs and demand, which are enormous at national level, it is unthinkable that they can be met only by specialist services of the Central Administration, and the only Mortgage Fund of Rwanda; he does that immediately we must provide the latter, the supports and resources so that it meets the expectations that we have placed in it for property development.

Another social acquis that it will deepen, although it must recognize the significant progress achieved in this area is the country's supply of drinking water. We are pleased that the entire population of our country has understood the paramount importance of drinking water, for health, for the survival of our children. The new provisions concerning the management of rural water should guarantee consumers the usufruct of this precious commodity is water, and on a later date for its self-management, guaranteeing its sustainability.

We invite everyone to scrupulously respect these public structures that are managed sources and fountains. The development of a Water Sector Master Plan and legislation is expected.

In another area, that of health, remarkable efforts have been made 105 of our 143 municipalities have now a health center; the fight against endemic diseases and epidemics has already won victories that we believe sustainable; nutrition education and the maternal protection increased. Our goal satisfactorily nationwide promptly continue to mobilize the attention of the authorities, a greater effort to be particularly oriented towards the training of health personnel.

Militants,

The relationship between housing, health, water, and environment can not escape us, judicious use of our ecological heritage allows to find many resources to meet our basic needs in these areas.

Our development, our self-development can not be done, nor has fortiori, be maintained and consolidated, if we give to maintaining our natural, ecological balance, primary attention. The full maintenance of all of our environmental heritage is a major condition for our survival. In reality, it is a matter of survival for the entire Rwandan population.

We can not still build our wealth by the destruction of our national heritage or meet some of our basic needs (health, water, housing) by the irreparable deterioration of our national ecosystem.

Therefore, Militants, it is our duty, our moral responsibility to our children, to the generations that will follow us to maintain our many natural reserves of the Virunga Park, the Akagera park and forest Nyungwe.

These two parks and the forest of Nyungwe Militants is like the lungs of our body. As the lungs, they allow our country body to breathe, drink water because they regulate the exchange of oxygen (air) and water, essential to our survival, essential to the regeneration of our ecosystem. We would like all of us always better understand the extraordinary benefits that represent the three nature reserves for the survival and future of our country.

Anyway, Militants, even if these three reserves were not indispensable to the survival of our economy - BUT THEY ARE! - we bring a temporary land occupation of the Akagera park, for example, land also known for their low quality?

A few years respite for some perhaps, but it allows to confront the challenge that is essential: an intensification of our agricultural production, a revolution perhaps in our farming methods, a reorganization of our fabric Production for us to create work opportunities for everyone.

It is now, today we must engage in this fundamental process, and we would render the worst service to our youth, the generation that follows us, if we delay this time, deceived by how pernicious lures of misuse of some poor land to the detriment of our future. Opening our parks would not solve anything, neither in the short nor in the medium or long term especially, the problem of overloading of our agricultural space.

It is therefore in our vital interest to safeguard in the richness and diversity of fauna and flora, these exceptional nature reserves. And now appear the acts of poaching, fires and volunteer bushfire in what they more reprehensible, more criminal: acts directly directed against the interest of us all, and especially against our young people against the generation that follows us. We will continue to increasingly punish these criminal acts, with all the vigor required by the vital nature reserves represented by our stake. We appeal particularly pressing local authorities, especially the mayors concerned. We will evaluate their performance through fast and effective way they have managed to eradicate this scourge.

At a time when we celebrate the 50th anniversary of our national parks will require more than ever that their future is assured.

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

The manifesto of our Movement states: "The Movement believes in the equality of men and complementarity of their cultures. However, to contribute to the enrichment of universal culture, every people must first find and define his own genius. The Rwandan people must define its culture and immerse themselves in deep he can finally bring to other cultures that it has authentic and remove wisely what can hone his. "

"Also, the Rwandan culture purified of all that is opposed to strengthening national cohesion and progress of Rwandan society will be popularized."

National institutions have performed all these directives. Responding to our call as of July 5, 1978. In our message of this day, we said: "Culture is basically the people that matter is the source ... What interests us is to see the true content circumscribed our culture, to leave its static and dynamic at the service of mobilizing our people for development.

Our wish is that no companies or institutions without a well-organized cultural educational activity. We need to ensure, as part of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development and all economic and social institutions harmonious interweaving of production with education, working with the organization of leisure, to make our primary schools , junior, senior, our military camps, our companies and institutions of powerful centers of formation of the new man, free from remnants of the feudal system, with a broad cultural horizon, a high of responsible citizen awareness.

Culture in all its aspects including physical education and sports, must be rooted in the basic, primary school, in the cells and common areas and not be matter of a few privileged groups. "

In this research resuscitation of our culture, we have always sought a balance between our authentic cultural heritage, witness the traditional cohesion of our society and the requirements imposed on us by the "modern" world. We have already said that we must find an attitude that combines the maintenance and strengthening of our cultural heritage with the demands of the so-called "modernity."

And this cultural balance must be sought primarily for our young people, so that Rwanda can tomorrow, as healthily as he did until now to preserve its identity, strengthening its political and social institutions, rejecting the excesses and not assimilate what really elevates us. Encourage young people to write the history of our country, legends, proverbs, poems. The expression of our culture wants intense, through animation, through our ballet and all the Rwandan genius can create.

Activists, Activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

The preparation of our fourth National Plan for Economic, social and cultural 1987-1991 is one of our fundamental concerns of this year. Work started enthusiastically in a wider consultation framework. The value of our Fourth Plan will be the price of the effort to overcome the difficulties encountered by our planning system in the past and seriously address the constraints of time to achieve the best result.

We made clear in our Keynote Address of January 8, 1984 and in our message on the occasion of New Year 1985, the approach for the development of our next plan; which will be a "planning tool that is available to us, which addresses our own, and only then, what we really believe possible and probable as support may come from outside." The guidelines are clear, will not be repeated today.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

Ten years of M.R.N.D., this instrument gathering quintessential helped organize ourselves into a political force, to equip ourselves with active bodies at all levels of the country. Its goal is the organization of our forces, mobilizing ever larger, more suitable for our country, for development tasks ahead, and are sometimes overwhelming. The Mr. R.N.D. invited the Rwandan people to meet, and first have confidence in himself. Through animation, he recovered and upgraded its culture. Through UMUGANDA he discovered the power of his will, the many fruits of his sweat. Together, we built this individually we would never have done.

Ten years of UMUGANDA, so this is the pride of living much of our progress through the strength of our own arms, through our efforts of all of us, by the sweat of our brow. Without UMUGANDA this means: no health centers, no schools, no tracks, no charitable efforts. The UMUGANDA - our collective efforts for development - it is still the promise of real progress to come.

ANIMATION, this was the institution for policy learning, participation in national political efforts, the pride of belonging to the same country, communion among all the forces of the country. The animation is also dialogue on the problems of our country, becoming aware of civic rights and duties; Animation is still the joy of living our values ​​and our cultural heritage, to participate in a common impetus to the consolidation of our national identity. For the animation and the UMUGANDA got reacquainted with our ancestral values.

Ten years is a lot and it's little. Ten years is the opportunity to take stock of what has been done, certainly, but it is also the need to ensure that today's reality has not denied the aspirations and perceptions ago ten years; Ten years is still the opportunity to reflect on possible adjustments to be made on the new challenges to face.

Ten years of presence and activities M.R.N.D. we have led the way to be followed. Ten years of the M.R.N.D. we have proved that its foundations were correct, that the promises that we have placed in him were fulfilled, he will continue in the path taken, to consolidate the achievements of the deepening, to be open to the to come up.

The establishment of training, a political organization, which correspond to our national genius, in agreement with our deepest aspirations, always, Militants, made the most significant challenge to which the Republic was Lieme s attack because a happy answer to this challenge affects everything else. It is our belief.

The force taken by our political movement, the establishment of democratic institutions show that we did not make a mistake, you all, Militants, have overwhelmingly accepted and integrated Ieurs principles and ideals.

The supreme bodies M.R.N.D. played a key role in the mobilization of our people for national development tasks: we grasp with a sincere eagerness the opportunity offered to us today in this day of celebration to publicly thank warmly all the members of these authorities for their exemplary dedication, without pause or rest, which allowed us to get where we got today. These thanks we wish them in our own name, but also and especially on your behalf. Militants, supporters and sympathizers.

These higher authorities and in particular the National Congress and the CENTRAL COMMITTEE is our reference, our inspiration.

In this memorable day that is the 10th anniversary of our movement, our thoughts, our wishes, our congratulations go also, spontaneously, this extraordinary living force that are our wives, our Rwandan our Militantes. Never, we say well, EVER, Activists of Mr. R.N.D., we could not have done as well in what we have accomplished in ten years, if our wives and daughters of Rwanda, had not played so remarkably role. This role, it is not we who had given them, this role is that our women have always had in Rwanda: the role of being the most rigorous strength of our people, the most respected strength too.

We wish Activists, to make them a particularly warm tribute, as the contribution of our women, who represent more than half of our population, in our national development is invaluable: the education of our children, feeding our population, improving habitat, peace in the home, the health of our children it is these tasks that shape a people, these are the tasks that our women provide day and night, these are the tasks that made our people. But our women, they are also producers, entrepreneurs, organizers, facilitators, trainers, they actively participate in national economic activities.

That is why the M.R.N.D. in principle granted to efforts to involve women in our political decisions of place: that our women are excluded or levels of decision making or access to the same resources and the same means only men.

We believe we have made significant progress in the recognition of equal access of women to our national resources; our number of girls attending school is very high, women occupy important positions, their responsibilities have increased; they are respected. But this is not enough; we encourage you, Activists, actively persevere, for you held the official place you back. Above all, we want you to participate more and more in national debates that you let us benefit from your wisdom, your thinking so that you're printing more and more your values ​​so that our society becomes ever more human, happier.

The mobilization of national efforts, the forces of our country around the national development tasks is not just the only bodies and activities M.R.N.D. We think for example the organization of our communal development, as the common basis of our territorial and political organization. What to do for the town increasingly become the foundation of our nation, for it assumes more and more the role of driving force of our development? How best to organize for it to become the true center of our development efforts, the real basis of national political power? How to deepen the autonomy of our prefectures yet provided in our Constitution?

In making these some questions we have in mind to foster dialogue, to explore, where appropriate, some new approaches, mobilize reflection for the V Congress of M.R.N.D., scheduled for next December. This is what Congress will try to respond to our concerns today so that our movement remains that living entity that we have been promoting.

We place great hopes in the next Congress M.R.N.D. for the Militants find answers to all our concerns. These major concerns that are ours, we have presented them in the form of five parameters, five poles, five critical areas, and that made the heart of our remarks today. They might believe us, usefully serve to channel some of the debates planned at the V Congress of M.R.N.D. These debates will then enable us to better direct the next decade, despite the overwhelming challenges ahead. We have even more hopes in the future that the first decade of our Movement has laid the foundation for us to consider this future with the conviction that our people will be able, as he always was, of successfully overcome the obstacles that will stand before him.

The information is, too, a way of powerful mobilization and organization of the living forces of a country. We say and we repeat it incessantly informed people are a people who has all the potential of its development and freedom.

We have made much progress in this area, but this is not enough. The private press has also contributed significantly to the information of the Rwandan people. Thus the press, supported by our desire to make it efficient, free of partisan chicanery, his obsession with the sensational, individual attacks, some nasty sometimes must feel more responsible for cementing the climate of peace and unit established by the 2nd Republic and tackle serenely to education and development of our people. We want all the media available to us are used and made available to people, they are strengthened and they serve to promote the development debate, national consolidation, deepening cultural and political cohesion of our country, to exchange ideas and experiences. Time is not it time to look seriously at an evaluation of our media, using them to identify a strategy that will meet the expectations of all of us in this area!

On this solemn day of 5 July 1985 we extend our thoughts and heartfelt thanks to all our friends - countries and international organizations, non-governmental organizations - with whom we have the honor to be bound by this extraordinary adventure of international cooperation. We depend, we will rely. We can only fervently hope that the serious efforts and believe that we have undertaken for 10 years and we had the opportunity to take stock today, you serve as proof that your cooperation is used wisely, that it was we needed to get where we arrived and that we will still be essential for long if we want to achieve our national self-reliance. It is this message of thanks and hope to invite you today to convey to your respective peoples, for peace and harmony extend and deepen between the peoples of this globe.

Militants of Mr. R.N.D.,

Ten years of Peace. Ten years Unit. Ten years of development. Ten years of individual and collective security. This thanks to the peaceful nature of our people who always aspired to maintaining peace and stability. Thanks also to the continued vigilance of all officials and Armed Forces, these irreplaceable pillars of harmony between the different components of the national family, shield of the integrity of the national territory. With the sum of the efforts of all the children of this country, we celebrate today, in simplicity, but with pride, ten years during which Rwanda has made significant progress despite its means I imitated.

On other occasions, we have recalled the role of the services responsible for order and security. We have them whenever asked to keep their dedication and loyalty to the people they emanate. Our calls are not been in vain. Many circumstances have shown the commitment of peacekeepers to the people and institutions it has data.

The Armed Forces and the security services in general therefore continued to deserve the homeland. They were actually integrated into general mobilization movement thus translating into concrete action the teachings of the Manifesto of Mr. R.N.D.

The Armed Forces, all services that serve the protection of each and everyone must always remain a reflection of National Unity, Unity in words and in deeds, Unity implies justice and fairness, the profound unity, unity of hearts, sustained and defended by all Unit, officers as directed. With conviction and selflessness. The leaders have a sacred duty to lead by example, for peace, unity and development.

It is our duty to all of us to ensure our behavior every day that peace and national unity are the cornerstones of all our actions whose primary objective must be the development of Rwanda and all Rwandans.

We will do everything to make it so.

And defense and security are not only military affair, but every Rwandan who will be more aware that eating better housed and better dressed more cleanly. The organs of the Movement and the Administration will work to emphasize this priority: Peace -Unit - which determines the survival and prosperity of our country. For it is peace and unity that we will always move forward, hand in hand, despite obstacles strewn strength on our way towards the development we want full by all Rwandans.

Activists, Activists,

We are entitled to congratulate ourselves on progress. All was not performed as we would have liked. We could not work miracles. And the path to development is still long. The various political bodies will continue to help Militants and activists to translate into deeds the ideology of our movement and the broad options recommended by our Government. We will continue to give our country a margin of sufficient financial and economic independence which is the basis of our self development. Our development policy will continue to aim for the betterment of the masses. We will continue to rely on our own strength; driven by the vitality and dynamism of our culture.

We also hope that the International Cooperation which, added to our own efforts, and that could help us to make significant progress, will always be supported and strengthened.

Ten years of existence of our M.R.N.D. have enabled us to reach important milestones in our development path. It is now considering with confidence and hope the next step. We invite you all, Militants, particularly you young Rwandan, Rwandan youth, to make every effort to that at the end of the next decade, we can say what we say today: We made a big step forward - the future of our children is insured!

Long live M.R.N.D. Vive Rwanda. Long live the cooperation between peoples.

