Activists, supporters, sympathizers of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, Distinguished Guests,

Here we are again met to assess the progress made since our last Congress in June 1983 and lay the new foundations for action that will guide our steps during the next deadline.

On this memorable day, I am pleased to discharge a pleasant duty to greet warmly among us the presence of the distinguished delegates from different African backgrounds, we bring the message of friendship and fraternity parties and friendly countries with which the MRND and Rwanda share the same aspirations.

In your name. Militants and delegates on behalf of the Rwandan people, I wish our dear guests a warm welcome in our country.

Distinguished Delegates,

Your presence is an eloquent testimony of the excellent relations existing between Rwanda and your Country. Also, Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development reflect you, through my voice, happiness and joy we now feel to have you with us.

The expression of sympathy and friendship that we bring you in addition to the support that our movement has always benefited from Political Organizations that you represent in this Congress.

The Republic of Rwanda has, in turn, each found in your respective country, significant support, the result of a deep friendship and a still active solidarity that characterizes our relations.

I beg you therefore, distinguished guests, bring the peoples friends and brothers who have joined us by your presence here, our mutual feelings of friendship and brotherhood.

I also take this opportunity to extend my sincere thanks to the Distinguished Representatives of the Diplomatic Corps here today to share our joy with the same availability on which we have also always counted.

I further address the special International Press sent many who responded to our invitation, my warm welcome greeting in the Pays des Mille Collines which they are bound, I am convinced, to capture and translate the profound realities and the everyday aspirations of the Rwandan people happy, like me, to welcome them.

Finally, I ask all of M.R.N.D. Militants make your stay in our country, as pleasant as possible, as alternate to the limited resources made available by the warmth of friendship and hospitality of the Rwandan people.

Militants Militants Congressmen,

Through you, worthy representatives of the Rwandan People, I address to all of M.R.N.D. Militants, and to all our supporters the salvation of Peace and Unity, the two cornerstones of our Movement.

Our greeting, become yours, for your own membership, must always be our weapon. With it nothing can shake our society. This greeting, beyond the mere verbal expression become for us a pattern of behavior that drives us constantly in our struggle to improve the quality of our lives, fighting for our development.

On this happy occasion, I extend a fraternal salvation you, distinguished delegates from all over the country to participate in the Fifth Regular Meeting of the Congress M.R.N.D.

It is, indeed, the fifth time, in accordance with Article 18 of the Statutes of the Movement, we meet to evaluate all our work, to reflect together, to rejoice in the not crossed and hold new resolutions to better establish our policy guidelines.

The Fifth Ordinary Congress of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development held its sitting at a particularly significant time for all of M.R.N.D. Militants We just celebrated the first decade of our Movement. The results which, together, we have succeeded, were considered very encouraging, thanks to the determination of each and all to build our country. The Movement urges us to work in peace, by combining our efforts for the development of every member of our society.

Our fifth meeting coincides therefore with the end of the first decade of our Movement. These ten years, as already described in the book commemorating the tenth anniversary of M.R.N.D. were very fruitful for all of us, even if we have not achieved all the objectives that we had drawn. I will not repeat the details of the review of the ten years of the MRND. I am pleased, however, to new achievements, how many, which we have earned the respect of our foreign friends who have continued to provide support our action.

Thank you, all of you, Rwanda and Rwandans, who have wholeheartedly embraced the ideals of our movement. Thank you to you who have put into practice and have instilled in generations. You understand that the development of Rwanda is the responsibility of each of us. Thank you to all of you. Activists, Activists who have helped me to wear every day the weight of heavy loads, but how exciting that you have entrusted to me. Rejoice all past results of these ten years in the Peace, in Unity.

The year 1985, which comes to an end, was very rich in events and political actions. You will recall, in fact, that earlier this year, we conducted new elections of our leaders in the sectors. In last September, we have elected the members of the Committees Cells, members of municipal committees and members of prefectural committees. Elections were also held in specialized cells: Public and Private Enterprises, Establishments and upper secondary schools. The seriousness of these elections proved once again that the people of Rwanda has developed his sense of exercising democracy, it is mature and responsible for his actions, and he is determined to make further steps in progress. We proved that we are committed to the principle of responsible democracy. We have focused our choice on real leaders, patriots, banishing the spirit of selfishness, are primarily devoted to the progress of society. The results of these elections we have also proved that we are permitted to rejoice particularly the progress achieved by women in Rwanda. It is becoming more and more places in our political bodies.

So this year gives us great joy to all these important achievements that will help us continue our struggle in our triple motto of Peace, Unity and Development.

Activists, Activists,

A meeting like this that brings us together today is not a simple rite. The National Congress is one of the central bodies of M.R.N.D., empowered to examine any national issue to find a solution that suits and generate resolutions that all other administrative bodies as well as policies are called to put into practice. I am aware that you all, old and new, know the role of this important body that is the National Congress. So I hope the foundation will present us a fruitful exchange of points of view in a climate of openness, and the conclusions drawn will be able to make us not to cross many in the period of two and a half years that we will lead to the next National Congress.

Activists, Activists,

Today I do not intend to repeat the feats of you M.R.N.D. during its first decade. My Speech from the 5th July and the work of the Central Committee M.R.N.D. devoted to the tenth anniversary of our movement you have said enough. I hope that this balance will rise to fruitful discussions. I do not make the results of these two and a half years that separate us from the IV Ordinary National Congress, held in June 1983. The Central Committee of the report prepared you all the details. I would just like at the beginning of this meeting, your attention is fixed on some important principles contained in the policy that guides all our business sectors. So that these are preliminary thoughts for us all, a reference, so that our deliberations are effective, that our resolutions are clear, achievable, realistic and oriented to our priorities, to better enable the next Congress to evaluate the impact.

Activists, Activists,

Peace is the cornerstone of our development. This peace, I ceased to support her. You yourselves are the data each other and have guarded jealously. It is always the motive of our actions.

Without peace, no harvests. Without peace, no wealth. Since 1973, I have never ceased to remind the Rwandan people that peace is the source of all development. Having peace is to have sufficient means of subsistence is to have decent housing is to be dressed properly and cleanly short, it's easy to live in a community progress. Peace is the main wealth of every Rwandan.

The thermometer of peace is social justice. It is in this context that the M.R.N.D. says in its manifesto that it "is satisfied that justice exercised by men of integrity is a prerequisite to democratic progress of human society." This court's role is to settle in equity disputes between citizens. We asked the judges to be honest. We asked those responsible to enforce judgments to fulfill their missions without delay or procrastination. Since the IV National Congress Ordinary M.R.N.D., Ministers concerned by these problems have breathed new wind. They reminded all those responsible for justice fulfill their duty. They have been heard. Hopefully their enthusiasm will continue, so that justice is healthy in our country so that the people of Rwanda have full confidence in our judges. To also that people do not waste time in endless trial. That innocent people suffer more crimes they have not committed. Those who are released behave as good citizens and do not pursue their neighbors who were the source of their detention.

And on July 5, I appeal to your good will to combat this practice tares in the wheat field of a few officials and other agents, who in response to requests addressed to them, calculate first and wait a few opportunistic benefits . Rwanda can not be a state of law, Activists, Activists, though, for a service which is due, so to get an answer to a problem in good rule, if to be engaged in such a position, although we has complied with established procedures, the flaw involving a third person, it engages in some venal behavior.

I have already condemned these practices and we need to suppress. Help me to suppress. Continue, I exhort you, all those who expect benefits to provide a service for which they are paid. Continue more those who seek to corrupt our society conceding of such bribes. My ambition, should I repeat, is to make this country a genuine rule of law. My concern is to promote justice in the service of all of us, for all of us to live in peace, can enjoy all the guarantees of their rights.

Activists, Activists,

The second pillar of our development is the unity among citizens, our cohesion, our frank fraternity in diversity. All, big or small, rich or poor, we all belong to the same nation.

While we are born to different families, we come from different regions of the country, but we all belong to one country: Our Dear Rwanda. How do we not united, we who enjoy a common cultural heritage, which we adhere to the same principles of our M.R.N.D. which banned discrimination of gender, religion, ethnicity, race, occupation or social conditions?

The much desired development is expressed not only in economic terms, it embraces our social life, our degree of knowledge, our degree of procuring the goods we need, our ability to build on our cultural values. Authentic development resulting from the individual progress of every Rwandan. This is an opportunity to praise all those who are dedicated to the integral development of Rwanda: domestic and foreign, scattered throughout the thousand hills of Rwanda, for their tireless zeal in favor of the poor.

My thanks to all those engaged in development work without being busy with their own gain, but dedicated and courageous first dedication to community progress. All these are commendable and should serve as examples to others. As we condemn all those who cultivate the spirit of stray and laziness.

Militants,

The Commune is the basis of our development. And the Commune is not this administrative building, nor the person who exercises authority. The Commune, development base, is the administrative entity enjoying autonomy, all administered mobilized to be the engine of national development. This means that the local authorities should be foremost facilitators of development. If each Commune is determined to achieve its progress, the country can only benefit from this global movement. I again ask the municipal authorities, in cooperation with the basic organs of M.R.N.D. including Cell, raise awareness for its own development. I said and I repeat, development can only come of mental and physical effort of all the forces of our people. The development is based on the will of the people.

Thus, the cell, the sector should be structured so that they help the municipality to actually become the basis for development. The cell composed of citizens, often neighbors, united by multiple affinities, by frequent meetings, is the organ par excellence of gathering and sharing of ideas and forces able to accelerate our development. Provided it is driven by a core of honest men, loyal and dedicated. We hope that the elections on 1 September last have made the necessary renewal. So in the next five years, the Cell will prove its dynamic role in development of the Commune. This is why we believe that every member of the Unit Committee must have specific duties, able to value by its actions within the community.

Activists, Activists,

IVth Congress National Ordinary M.R.N.D. has resolved to grant an annual incentive payment to members of the Committees of ordinary cells. This resolution has been executed since 1984. In its implementing instructions, the Central Committee said that this premium can be taken for a salary and that, therefore, it can not be automatically assigned. Also, any beneficiary should he first get an appreciation of its merits coast to receive a corresponding premium.

The granting of this premium in 1984, caused some difficulties have been overcome, although we have made some discontent due to considered unfair ribs. The premiums beneficiaries prefer, this means, all of their premiums is a yield obtained. Population thinking about it, it must boost the nucleus of the cell and in particular by excluding those who are rated "poor". To this question, this Congress will provide an answer.

I ask Councilors Sectors and Commons officials to avoid any complacency coast - The M.R.N.D. can be strong, nor bear fruit if its roots are undermined and weakened.

The cell must therefore develop further in fulfilling its role as facilitator of progress. The Cell should ensure peace among its members. The Cell should serve as leaven development.

If I insisted on the role of the cell and its Committee is that I am convinced that only their vitality can help us to implement the principle of making the City the basis of development. So I ask the authorized bodies to continue discussions on the role to be played by the cell in the development of the town as well as in the overall policy of our movement.

Militants,

We aim to bring government closer administered has continued to be our concern. Sub-prefectures were created in the country and dropped the cumbersome movement of the population, although the infrastructure and logistics are not yet sufficient, I know that those responsible for the Sub-Prefectures do all they can to fulfill their role satisfactorily. I encourage these efforts.

Some argue that laws covering municipal and prefectural legislation to be reviewed. The concerned officials already working it so that our administration can better address the concerns of the population and especially the prefecture knows him his legal status guaranteed by the Constitution. We should also hasten the development of the law governing the capital.

The key however is not the renovation of the texts: the most important is the renewal of men and good will. I know that inadequate legislation blocking the administration. But I am far from believing that all our legislation is inadequate. What is required instead of the authorities is to be convinced of their role as servants of those they administer, honest and dedicated guides.

I can only regret the carelessness of these authorities will not hear the grievances of thy people, who keep silent in front of the problems, which hide their laziness under the runaround, who hide their incompetence by referring, without any solution of effort all the questions submitted to them, to higher authorities.

I can not accept the insolence of themselves or of those agents who nevertheless started having them signed by their own hand convocations, returns every time after the hearing of those candidates, making perpetual pilgrims before their lords offices . Why call a person if it is not available on the day indicated to him? All authority has to know that his master is the people, that is the essence of democracy. The Manifesto M.R.N.D. indicating that "power must be democratic and strong," he says does not at the same time that "the people must control the state and the state must be guided by the real needs di * People constantly adapting the Soft * ment policy in its economic, social and cultural

Our administrative authorities received our confidence for politicians becoming the anal ideals of our movement. We ask them to be a light to those entrusted to them to be good guides for them. They are always ready to act in the direction desired by the M.R.N.D. They serve as a model of peace, unity and progress. Whether facilitators convinced Works Community Development - UMUGANDA -.

The animation, I said, should not be limited to songs in rhythmic expressions. The dances and songs are certainly vibrate our heart and body and externalize the principles we believe in. But the time we devote to entertainment should be an opportunity to deepen the ideals of this movement, absorb it, see together how to run, how do still better.

On this side, the UMUGANDA is familiar. It is for us a way that we have adopted to build our country by pooling our efforts. Its value has already been proven us. What I hope for all Rwandans, is to take the time to reflect on the benefits of community development work. Let them put their heart, they are looking at the possible aspects to straighten. I ask again that the projects to be implemented as part of this work is best planned, they follow an order of priority, starting with the most urgent and according to well-defined deadlines. Moreover, the population must be informed in time all these projects both in their early stages in their final phase. The planning and control structures have been put in place at national and prefectural level.

Activists, Activists,

I know for a fact that there are still some people who are afraid to speak out, and prefer the murmur. What can I do to show them my desire to follow the policy M.R.N.D. which entitles every individual to freely express their thoughts, and request to engage in a national development that reflects our own will, our genius, our own sense of responsibility. The Manifesto M.R.N.D. Does not he says: "The big traditional freedoms: freedom of opinion, freedom of press, freedom of conscience, religious freedom and exercise are guaranteed"? He added: "These freedoms must be exercised in the discipline, to strengthen the social order, consolidate peace and national unity and ensure the best individual performance in the constructive activities of the nation."

I tried for myself to follow these principles. No one has been prosecuted for his ideas expressed in a meeting or in a newspaper. The press must be for us a lantern and a hyphen between the different layers of the population.

She must not get distracted. It must serve to advise the authorities of different levels. It shows no shyness stock of achievements and there; it does not hide our failures, not dramatize; that we warn of the dangers if it is satisfied to have them discovered.

Some were afflicted by shortness of breath or stop some of our publications. I am one of them. But let me reiterate that the first publications are their owners responsible. No authority can substitute for them. The M.R.N.D. itself can ensure that their climate for a healthy workplace and a real growth in total responsible freedom. If one is proud of the successes that Ton also recognize failures.

Militants,

Let me specify again our approach and instructions regarding economic policy.

It's in us setting clear objectives, our means, we will be able to ensure the well-being of every child in our country. It's having the courage to make the reforms we dictate the environment in which we operate, we will maintain the line of development that we have set.

To better meet the deadlines that we expect, my Government has undertaken to clean up the economic unit and boost production. I would again like to remind you the actions to be conducted sensitively and expeditiously to achieve the results we all want.

Our leaders of Finance and Economy are well aware. Our tax code should be adapted to current requirements to be both a tool of distributive justice and play a stimulating role in our economy. Tax reform must go hand in hand with improving methods of perception.

Prudent management of our scarce foreign exchange must be reinforced by a customs code that meets our requirements. We want to ensure the supply of the country in mass consumer goods and services and at least maintain our level of equipment. We are called to promote the conquest of foreign markets for the rest of our production, not to mention a good tariff must meet the expectations of our policy of small and medium enterprises.

A good budget management, embodying our desire not to live beyond our means, is the first element for the sound management of our finances. The austerity and rigor must guide every management act. Here I emphasize the good management of our debt. The Ministry of Finance and Economy is one manager of our public debt and no contract shall be signed without the prior approval of our finance officials. Let us commit the future of our children by allowing them to perform one day of the liability that we have bequeathed them. The country must take advantage of its debt.

We must increase our ability to diagnosis and analysis to better respond to economic events. To do this, we need a public accounting rigorously held and which provides information on the financial situation within the time allow us to respond quickly at the first signs of disturbance.

The Government has undertaken to seek ways to better schedule our imports through better management. This is a priority if we want to maintain prudent management of our currency that has so far characterized our economic policy. I particularly speaking to the leaders of our trade for study sound policy of import licenses.

I do not get tired of asking that develops good trade policy, trade policy that meets our requirements for equitable distribution of goods and services and promotes the development understand the trade. That trade officials and the Chamber of Commerce of Industry of Rwanda enroll this objective in their priorities. While it may be difficult to specialize our business, however it is possible to encourage the consolidation of our business by product categories. If all this is not our present stage, the silence is broken to provide a study demonstrating the impracticality of this action. I'm not against the stalls or small bazaars; they can survive next to a good well organized trade. But when I see the multitude of intermediaries, the meeting of the wholesale function of small wholesaler, retailer and even window dresser in a single agent, I am increasingly sure there's something 'imperfect.

The consolidation of the economy is a prerequisite for the recovery of our production apparatus. We know the challenges we launched our demographic situation. All these young people look at us, all this driving force that challenges us, in front of our property assets which narrows, that the constraints that we urge to opt for a model of development that has its source in our cultural soul, our cultural heritage, a development which we know control parameters. This is why industrial strategy that managers of our industrialization are called to introduce ourselves, can only come from within. A strategy for developing a self-sustaining-men reduce the extroversion of our economy. It is to awaken the genius of the Rwandan people and to liberate the energies of a strategy that integrates all our. creative forces. This strategy will educate Rwandans have no inferiority complex for the product from its own technology. The integration and complementarity of the various sectors of our economy will be the key principles of this industrial strategy.

We do not want an idealistic industrial policy that dream just build large industrial cities by the deceptive drop of key factories in hand, but in reality just compromise and destroy our efforts and that we cost more than they do we relate.

Encourage the swarming of small and large will be grafted or born of these small industrial units. Those who are responsible for industrial operations include the need to loosen all the steps that must result in the birth of a company. It is not by unnecessary red tape a developer was encouraged to pursue his project. This is not stifling all the good initiatives that we will create jobs. We must understand that the paperwork must cease to be a heavy burden for the creative businesses.

My Government is very conscious of the role it must play in finding solutions to all our problems and particularly the rule that he must give the issue of job creation. This is why our industrial promotion policy and artisanal took a new direction. Our strategy of industrialization must be self-centered and endogenous. We said, we repeat. The setbacks experienced by some industrial projects, which did not fit well with our needs and realities, we are there to serve as lessons. We can not continue to dislocate more our economy by promoting the establishment of non-integrated industrial units, which are not in harmony with our business environment. We can no longer just rely on the land to provide employment to our youth. We need alternatives. And when it is said that most of industrial units spent at least 5 million Rwandan francs to create one job, that is enough to convince me that such actions fall far short of our expectations.

The Gross Domestic Product structure shows the predominance of the primary sector, with a 40% against 14% for the secondary sector. Yet I remain firmly convinced that the potential exists for a self-centered industrial development. We are mainly an agricultural country and opportunities for agricultural transformation abound. When economists, analysts say our manufacturing use in a major proportion, 52.5%, raw materials and imported intermediate, I am more convinced he need another industrial policy; that what was done was perhaps well-intentioned, but wrong.

That's why I asked, and I continue to require, that encourages small and medium enterprises and that does not marginalize crafts. Actions are taken to support small entrepreneurs and other more ambitious programs are designed to create an outbreak of small businesses across the country. The mistake is to believe that everything must be based in the capital, while the rural areas offer more interesting alternatives to see swarm of small industrial units through technology we can control and better pretty quickly. That's why we wanted the Investment Code, real industrial promotion tool, be revised to reflect our orientation, that he knows more than the small investor and be a decentralization tool economic.

We have materialized our commitment to give high priority to small and medium enterprises by creating the Fund Guarantee Special to solve the problems of collateral, collateral, opposed by banks to small project developers who despite the proven profitability, were abandoned for lack of funding. We can only encourage the Rwanda Development Bank and Banque Populaire, which are engaged in the financing of small activities, always pay more attention to this sector, focusing on rural areas. Experiences in Kigali City show that the informal sector is greatly job generator, while providing our market with good quality products at an affordable price. That is why I appeal to all managers: Members of the National Revolutionary Movement of the Central Committee for Development, Ministers, Members, Senior Officers of the State and Private Sector Businessmen, Parish of any Cult to serve as a model. The example they could give, and that produced a lot of training effects in the improvement of housing, hygiene, be reproduced for building strong cooperatives and better managed, d 'scattered in rural areas, small industrial entities that meet the basic needs of our people. Our banks are there for support.

I said 8 January 1984, I repeated 5 July 1985 and I repeat today, our next Economic Development Plan, Social and Cultural will be sharing various strategies developed by various ministries . This synthesis will have no other purpose than to harmonize strategies, prepare possible arbitration proposals on priorities, given the limitations of our resources, detailing financial planning, investments, ensure valuing the regional level as an important step in any planning. The Planning Ministry can not and should not replace other departments to develop strategies. We just want a plan that is realistic, at hand, given our resources. We have already developed strategies, others will come the complete.

We do not will reinvigorate our production apparatus with loss-making SOEs. We created them with specific objectives and must be achieved, otherwise these companies have no reason to be.

I ask the Minister supervising each public institution to understand that it is liable in the management of the public company as well as all management bodies, namely, the Board of Directors, the Board of Auditors Auditors, the Government Commissioners and Management. All these officials are appointed to these companies to ensure their expansion to enable them to achieve their goals. The failure of these companies is their failure. This is especially the failure of the Board in which the Government puts his trust. The laxity that characterizes some institutions must give way to rational management. These companies should no longer ignore the rules of modern management. They are not the homestead named directors; they must be directed in the best interest of all. This is why I invite the Directors of these institutions to ensure scrupulously respect the line adopted by the Government in the management of public affairs.

It is not normal, for example, that a public company employs 280 people where a private company employed in half, with much more positive results. It is not conceivable that a public bank fails where other banks succeed. How to explain that a state printing bankrupt, while private investments are good for business in the field of Printing and Stationary? It is surprising that a branch to the delight of private investors, is a drain on the public treasury. Where particular a high yield per hectare, the state must also achieve good scores or disengage to give place to those who succeed. Succeed or die, that's the deadline before which are now placed our public enterprises.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

If the second half of the 70s was characterized in Rwanda, by relatively high rates of economic growth, the current decade, however, has poor start, with economic and financial deterioration which endogenous factors are both cyclical and structural. But by 1982, the Government has addressed the causes of the economic deterioration that threatened to cancel the positive results achieved through the efforts, constantly growing, made by the Second Republic. The deterioration of the balance of payments only enough to be convinced of the urgent need to stop a series of measures for the restructuring of the National Economy. The Government had therefore taken steps to redress the balance of payments. The in-depth evaluation of these measures has been entrusted to the Ministry of Finance and Economy L. Indeed, the Government had noted the urgent need to put an end to our consumption habits adopted during the time of fat cows. This high propensity of government and household consumption, related to allocation of funds for investments "refuge", is typical of boom years; we can encourage.

Faced with this situation, the Government has reacted by adopting a general policy of austerity, already highlighted by the Third National Congress Ordinary of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development Policy austerity associated with the rigor in economic management. In 1983, we had to forget the reckless increases in the Ordinary Budget which had reached 24% in 1980 and 37.5% in 1981. All economic agents were convinced that it was impossible to continue to live beyond our means . Our economy had entered a contraction phase, accompanied by a relative deceleration of aid flows, which resulted in the significant deficit state of Rwanda's trade with the rest of the World.

The austerity and rigor, combined with a series of monetary and fiscal policy measures such as the restriction of imports, the revision of the tariff, the travel restriction on outside, the attachment of F RW DTS, etc ..., have kept the annual rate of price growth at a modest level, more than satisfactory for our country and to limit the effects of imported inflation.

This action program has improved the position of our balance of payments. The deficit of 3.459 billion francs in 1982 rose to 1,462 in 1983 and 1984 recorded a surplus of 1.4 billion surplus in which the price increase of certain of our exports such as tea had its share. At the same time, the inflation rate was 12.6% in 1982, 6.6% in 1983 was reduced to 5.4% in 1984. I take this opportunity to congratulate the entire Rwandan population that has support a situation imposed by circumstances, with a lot of goodwill.

We must maintain our consolidation efforts of the national economy in order to embark on the road to recovery with more rationality, rigor and through wise choices that still require sacrifices I must not tell you hide.

The results recorded in 1984 plead in favor of maintaining our policy. The gross domestic product recorded a real growth rate of around 4.6% against 0.6% in 1983. The agricultural production as food and industrial has, despite the drought, performed well and the secondary sector recorded a positive business move.

The 4th National Ordinary Congress asked the Government to further consolidate the management of our public finance and ensure the recovery of the balance of payments. Thus the additional measures, including the patch type were taken; they have already acted positively on the current account, boosting foreign exchange earnings and discouraging their output.

My Government has been working to reduce the deficit of the regular budget by the simultaneous increase in the revenue performance positions and limiting spending. This effort of the Government manifested at all positions of the general budget of the state. Thus the general state treasury had a surplus of about 1.5 billion in 1984.

But we must not be dimmed by some good results already. Much remains to be done. I urge the managers of our finances to fight against fraud and tax evasion by strengthening audit brigades that frame the tax services in the audit. All looking for ways to improve the state of our finances should start by improving tax collection. The tax must also assume its role of distributive justice and do not just settle for not hitting the categories of taxable most vulnerable. This is why the training of our tax and customs officials must register as a priority in the short-term actions by financial managers. This training should also target search of improved techniques of budget preparation and execution, not to mention the recovery of public accounting services to be able to constantly provide timely and reliable information tailored to the needs of analysis and management of the national economy. The state has also just getting a large debt on it. Should it be profitable.

All measures of good management of our finances should be based on an appropriate tax system. I reiterate my appeal launched on 8 January 1984 for our officials to expedite public finance tax reform as expected. The promotion of our industry and our exports will impose constraints; adapting our tariff will not be without sacrifice.

Some believed that our policy of austerity and rigor addressed only the services of the central administration. It is a national policy; it must be followed at all levels of national life. Some officials of public institutions in commercial and industrial nature have not yet understood that they are called to change their mindset to improve the profitability of public enterprises. I still remember when the state does not continue to wear at the end of firms with chronic deficits arm. Improving the performance of these public institutions is the responsibility of all those involved in their management, ie all management bodies to guardianship. It is time that everyone is judged by the results achieved and resources used and not according to personal relationships he managed to establish with his superiors, or the influences he wants to intervene.

IVth Congress National Ordinary M.R.N.D. recommended to the Government to further support public institutions and strengthen their control. This is evidenced by the creation of a Central Accounting and Organization responsible for assisting the Government in the restructuring and revitalization of the management of these companies. The choice of priority missions have been operated and national experts and expatriates this service under the President of the Republic attèlent it vigorously.

A relaunch focuses on the path of dynamic development capable of ensuring the well-being of our people is only possible if the finances of our common, genuine development cells are healthy. Fiscal discipline must also characterize the management of these. We have always stressed, the town must be the real engine of our national progress. Our efforts to provide them with social and administrative infrastructure base are part of this line. Now that almost all of our municipalities have administrative buildings, it is time to allocate resources to the greatest possible number of revenue-generating projects, profitable to the finances of the municipality. It is here that the Municipal Development Fund, which has to take a new direction, is expected to focus its intervention. Think of the problems of employment, education, health, etc ... in a demographic burden increasingly heavy. This is the nation that has to start. Only the government can not cope with all the challenges we launched.

That is also why I call on the national consciousness that we consume Rwanda. It is a matter of common sense and good citizenship.

Living beyond our means is nothing other than to import office furniture when our craftsmen know how to make; it is also wearing a dress made abroad, while many garment factories located here and there we can procure; and is adopting bad habits of imported products, simply because we are sharpened by an advertising matracage.

We can not afford to waste our scarce foreign exchange, compromising our future by the thoughtless consumption of products that kill our crafts, our know-how. All this requires good trade policy, a policy that will allow us to significantly reduce the trade deficit, to favor the importation of capital goods and production and helps us to substitute domestic production for imports. The search for our current account balance goes by promoting exports and broadening the range of exportable products, as it is incompatible with an expansionist policy of imports. Without effective management of imports, we annihilate our chances of industrial take-off. With disordered imports, we are ruining our policy of import substitution and we compete, unfair way our craftsmen.

These truths must be repeated, so that we all be ever more convinced and we all live, every day, in everything we do.

Who says good import management, said good political import licenses, which implies the existence of an effective national distribution network. In short, it's the same mastery of national trade.

The organization of our trade goes first, as already said, by the organization of trade activities, with proper regulation and good pricing policy that reflects our true aspirations. A trade where the farmer does not feel crushed, where he finds his compensation for his efforts, which he sees motivated to increase production because he knows he will find a remunerative price for its agricultural and livestock products; this is what we demand. Here, I recall that trade is not the refuge of criminals: it must be rid of its non-transparent activity label. Lately we see proliferate companies or institutions that serve as cover for other illegal activities. We must exercise the activity for which it is registered in the trade register, and not hide behind it for fraud or serve as intermediary for unauthorized activities. I launch my appeal to the Rwandan people that he is more interested in import-export trade, creator of progress, instead of being confined in all kinds of speculative activities. The Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Rwanda has initiated a training program for our businessmen. This initiative must continue and I urge all our merchants to register many of these courses to help in the exercise of their profession. The C.C.I.R. should serve their cell meeting, animation and guide for their activities. It must act as a data bank and an intermediary with other partners both domestic and foreign.

Militants,

One of the fundamental tasks that awaits those responsible for the national economy, is restructuring it to make it both more efficient and more self-centered, that is to say, a restructuring for accumulating wealth through our priority development of our own resources in terms of our basic needs.

This is why the first draft of a sanitation and Recovery Plan was developed according to instructions; this plan has already been intense interdepartmental coordination. It will now, to make it as operational as possible, to identify what contributes to short-term consolidation, which is quickly achievable, while matters relating to the restructuring of our economy, c that is to say, anything that has a longer-term effect and whose implementation takes longer, will now be deepened through clearly developed programs, specific responsibilities, means judiciously implementation and realistic deadlines. It is clear that part of the project of recovery and consolidation that addresses the restructuring of the economy will contribute to a decisive way, to the orientation of some priority national strategies that will form the bulk of our fourth Plan.

Militants,

Already, we should mention that some of the cleanup and recovery measures have been or are being implemented. Thus, the long awaited revision of the Investment Code, for small and medium enterprises, regional decentralization and greater flexibility, will be completed shortly. EU addition, the tariff revision was completed; it is now to be endorsed by the political authorities. The new regulation on prices and trade margins is far advanced, while the regulations on foreign trade and licensing policy has facilitated certain economic operations. In terms of agricultural producer prices, orders relating thereto have already been discussed in the Council of Government; they provide higher floor price paid to producers, to encourage them to produce more, so that consumers know perfectly well trade margins that can be added; is expected to publish them, as the list of products concerned is completed.

The Special Guarantee Fund in accordance with instructions, has been restructured. This instrument seems now play its role more effectively, responding better and better to the spirit in which it was designed.

I am particularly pleased to report that our efforts to modernize the structure of our economy receive significant support from the United States of America Government that supports some of the costs that any restructuring inevitably, which we will facilitate the establishment of the revision of tariffs in particular.

So, as you can see, Militants, the Government is actually attached, seriously, to the progressive consolidation and the recovery of our economy. The positive effects that this discount will soon manifest, for the greater good of our production apparatus.

That Militants, what I wanted to tell you, to tell you again, as regards the key supporters of our economic policy and the resulting priorities for the immediate future. The instructions were given, and given back. I demand that they be executed promptly.

Militants,

As I said on the occasion of the opening of the Fourth Ordinary Congress of M.R.N.D., our economy is based on agriculture. This indeed occupies over 90% of the population. Therefore since the last convention, a special effort has been directed towards agricultural activities.

The IV Congress Ordinary M.R.N.D. had recommended that the Government continue agricultural intensification to produce more on smaller surfaces. It is for addressing this concern that the year 1984 was dedicated to food production and 1985 for food production and fertilizer. This meant continuing the effort to combat erosion, dissemination of selected seeds and pesticides, the use of organic and mineral fertilizers, improved cultivation techniques, assollement, practice rotations, the association compatible cultures, so many techniques to intensify our agriculture.

These two years that elapse saw the implementation of an action program to increase agricultural production. Thus in order to ensure the availability of organic matter, the area under fodder crops was doubled from 1983 to 1984 and the number of stable manure has grown steadily (81,764 in 1983 and 87,727 in 1984) .

In the field of mineral fertilization, Rwanda is in its early testing. In 1985, it received more than 2,000 tons of chemical fertilizers. The distribution to farmers is through rural development projects against payment to allow the formation of a national stockpile of fertilizer that may potentially be increased by the contribution of local merchants. On the other hand, progressive farmers continued at agricultural competitions, receiving fertilizer prices as the best farmers.

For better planning of this activity, the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Forestry has established a division of selected seeds, whose mission is to plan, develop and implement the seed production policy selected and oversee the growth nationally. A National Committee of varieties and seeds has been created and sponsors the activities of the division. The making available quality seeds to farmers is a prerequisite for increased agricultural production. Their distribution is made by the channel of rural development projects and prefectural and municipal services.

Efforts have been made to recover and develop the marshland. Thus the new organization of services of the central government has planned a division to deal with developments irrigation marshes.

In 1984, the Study Project Management Plan Mu-tara before among others to the study of a project of irrigation in the marshes Kagitumba-Muvumba was launched.

The same year, during the fortnight of the projects, the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Forestry has officially mandated to oversee development work to enable farmers bordering the Nyabarongo to culture this vast swamp. We strive parallel to find donors to fund global studies and implementation of rational management of this marsh. Small development work also continues in small marsh.

In forestry, the general management of forests has been institutionalized within the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Forestry. It has in its attributions the formulation and implementation of the Country in forestry policy and the development and implementation of a National Plan forest. In 1984, the area covered by woodland amounted to 539 937 ha of which 102,653 ha planted until 1983 and 126,242 ha until 1984. Research at the ISA R continues to expand the list of species that do not harm crops.

On 2 November 1985, Rwanda was celebrating its 10th anniversary of the national day of the tree institutionalized in 1976. The importance of the tree has been so understood by all that day, rulers and ruled, officials, artisans or peasants, children, young and old, and all our foreign friends have mobilized without exception to plant at least one tree.

I learn with satisfaction that attempts to ask a small contribution to the beneficiaries of forest plans, begun as a pilot test in the capital, was a resounding success. This demonstrates once again the importance that gets the shaft in the daily life of the population.

To allow the balance between the price at harvest and the sowing, OPROVIA attempts to install warehouse sales across the country. And, in this same office, a research project on the long storage of beans avoiding its hardening is underway in the GRENARWA - II project.

The symposium on agricultural marketing in Rwanda, organized in 1985 demonstrated that Rwandan farmers do not fully benefit from what they produce. Discussions on the remunerative price policy, strengthening the OPROVIA, agricultural credit, the trade organization has resulted in recommendations will be taken into account, especially in terms of price support to farmers. We need a clear policy of rehabilitation of the farmer-breeder. Because "it is he who produces the food; from him depends the solution of the problem of hunger. As he moved to the city, it ceases to be a producer; it becomes a consumer and often unemployed. Unlike the European rural exodus that occurred by calling the industry, urbanization Third World mostly comes from the rejection of rural life, its material conditions thankless and "account deficit" that strikes The peasant. Rehabilitating the peasant condition is curb urbanization means avoiding demobilization of the production system is contributing to the solution of the problem of hunger. To achieve this, we must encourage producers to produce, thanks to attractive prices, to insured opportunities, accessible credit and the supply of essential inputs. "

Militants,

The increase in urban population will depend on the absorption capacity of the rural world. Despite our best efforts, this absorption capacity has reached in some areas that a limit would be illusory to postpone indefinitely.

The convergence of two ways of living, the European single-family villa and traditional Rwandan habitat has produced a kind of occupation of extremely expensive urban area in which the state can assume the investment and operating expenses of sailings roads in, water and electricity. The development of the habitat sector strategy is timely.

This strategy must be part of a land use policy to:

a balanced distribution of the urban population between urban districts and all agglomerates centers to develop or strengthen; rationalization of consumption of space by the densification of urban housing and consolidation of structural facilities; participation in the management of urban areas and agglomerated local authorities and users.

The strategy of the habitat is imperative to consider an application for more than 90% of households using informal channels on housing. This will require that adapts the mechanisms of financing and credit to the production and management of housing in the different segments of demand.

The Habitat strategy will also ensure the adequacy of laws and land regulations to the requirements of new ways of organizing space and give the construction industry the leading role of creator-farm employment.

Militants,

The rural absorption capacity will be increased if we can ensure the accessibility of health and education to all farmers and all Rwandan peasants. It is not enough to claim that all Rwandan and all Rwandans have the right to benefit from these services they receive, it is necessary that these services exist close to home and they work in good conditions . It is true that the spread of our population throughout the national territory is a handicap for staffing service campaigns. But precisely this constraint requires us to design a framework of health centers and relatively uniform and homogeneous schools, conducive to geographically cover the whole of his country.

In recent years, several projects related to the restructuring and expansion of health centers have emerged, and the health map is constantly improving.

And should not the basic health policy that supported the Government of Rwanda is challenged by budget-operations.

It is fortunate that develops a drug delivery system with the implantation of drug in different categories. But it is high time that we encourage the creation in our country of production units and packaging of medicines so as to make the price of medicines affordable by many.

National education is the largest employer in the country, it is also undoubtedly the user the biggest real estate. The capacity of the two ministerial departments are proportional to those of the state. This is why private initiatives coming judiciously complement the Government's efforts in the creation of schools have been supported and encouraged.

I personally like to stress that it would be vain to promote competition between a formal network financed by state funds and a free network organized on the basis of private initiative. We do not have the means to have that luxury. Both initiatives should be complementary networks. I would therefore like once again to reiterate the importance that the entire country could be covered by a network of schools, the number and the capacity is proportional to the demographic weight of the region they serve.

Militants, Development requires access to water and energy availability.

We are all convinced that access to drinking water quality and quantity is the first step to real development in rural areas and the minimum standard of comfort in urban areas. According to the latest estimates, 65% of the rural population had access to equipment that might provide them with drinking water.

Rwanda has engaged and continues to raise considerable sums to expand and improve the distribution of drinking water. As an example, I cite in rural areas: water supply projects Mutara and Bugesera - Central and North, the renovation and extension of drinking water supply systems in the region lava, the drinking water supply project of Kibungo Prefecture; Urban: the power projects of drinking water Urban districts of Byumba, Gikongoro, Gisenyi and Gita-rama, Cyangugu, Kibungo, Kibuye, Ruhengeri and Rwamagana.

This considerable heritage requires constant maintenance and careful, rigorous and transparent management. The mayors were made aware of these aspects and I am sure they are fully aware of the challenge represented by the guarantee to all inhabitants of the country have access to safe drinking water. Based on the institutional study on the management of rural water, the Government Council is to discuss measures to be taken so as to assume by users predominant part in the management of hydraulic structures.

The country is now equipped with a relatively large interconnected power system: all seats of prefectures are now connected to the national grid since the inauguration of medium voltage lines Kabarondo - Kibungo - Zaza and Ruhengeri - Gisenyi. Our hydroelectric sources put us temporarily away from an energy deficit. Our position will be further enhanced when we can count on the contribution of the Ruzizi - II. Other projects that we intend to carry out are being studied.

A vast project to operate methane gas has just started.

But electricity remains accessible only fuel the so-called effective demand. It is important to promote and develop the use of alternative fuels. timid experiments but, I think, significant enough, have been successfully carried out in the country. It seems such as solar generators - provided they have been subject to a minimum of care on the part of their users -aient satisfactory and that the limited time charges allows to offset the amount of investment.

It is important to make an effort of thought and imagination, and do not be afraid to innovate in this area. The power transmission is expensive and the rural population does not yet represent a solvent demand. Under these conditions, we must try to exploit other sources of renewable energy (solar, hydro, vegetable) or fossil (peat) and develop required but suitable networks from tiny clusters with term perspective to be able to integrate and interconnected to the national grid.

Militants,

You are aware that the problem of our isolation is a serious impediment to our development. The considerable efforts we have made so far and we intend to continue because it also going to our survival, should be part of a national strategy of opening up. This overall strategy would consider the acceleration and multiplication in all forms of interregional exchanges within the national territory as the outside.

In the past two years we have made an improvement and a substantial expansion of our road network. The asphalted axis Butare - Gikongoro - Cya-Ngugu is underway while the construction of the axis Kayonza - Gabiro - Kagitumba will start soon.

After completion of the projects we have prioritized, road repair Kigali - Gatuna Gitarama road construction - Kibuye, Gitarama road - Gatumba - Mukamira; we will need to evaluate seriously our financial and technical capacity to support the maintenance of a larger network asphalted.

We want the strengthening of means of transport of people and goods and the promotion of private and public transport companies, but we claim that our activities are disciplined and are conducted in compliance with laws and regulations.

The communications and transportation in our country now relies on equipment that meets international standards. The airport Kanombe infrastructure is now completely finished. The tasks ahead, focus on improving the management, operation and safety of aeronautical facilities, improving the functioning of national aviation services and the opening of our facilities to air transport companies. Administrative measures have recently been taken for this purpose. In recent years, the development of telecommunications has occupied a prominent place among the priorities of the Government. At present, all prefectures and the number of sub-prefectures are in satisfactory communication with the capital. But in some time the entire network will be automated and opportunities for contact abroad will be greatly facilitated.

However, I would stress the need, as part of the General Telecommunications Development Program, to continue our efforts so that every town and if possible every medical training, each community (high school, barracks, prison, ...) are connected to telephone network. This policy is dictated to us by the need to provide every opportunity for rural areas of developing into can rely on a minimum of equipment available to anyone in the city. Thus rural communications will improve coverage of rural information.

Militants,

Planning - in the sense of introducing an ever greater coherence in our development efforts - is undoubtedly the instrument that allows us to control the destiny of our economic, social and cultural development of our country. This is the planning exercise that should help us set goals that we are able to achieve according to our own resources and those that we are reasonably able to mobilize outside. It must draw the framework of a balanced development between respect for our environment and the development of local resources between the revitalization of urban activities and entertainment in the countryside, between promoting private initiatives and increased the effectiveness of the machinery of state.

The Third Plan was probably developed more carefully than previous plans. The evaluation of the Third Plan on its first three-year period (1982 to 1984) highlights the exaggerated optimism planners as to the objectives that we are really capable of achieving. It should be noted that external resources from bilateral and multilateral cooperation are shrinking and are not offset by the increase in refundable credits. Meanwhile foreign direct investment in Rwanda is still very shy and even random in the terminology of the Plan. As for internal funding sources, they leveled off and may not increase in the short term significantly.

It is therefore essential that in the coming years, our fiscal planning is based on realistic economic planning, even mundane, and opposes launch fanciful projects, inappropriate and too expensive.

Militants,

Wisdom, that besides our foreign friends we readily acknowledge, requires us not to live in - our means. Let's avoid mortgaging the future of our children into debt we inconsidérablement for actions which we do not precisely know the ins and outs, we not assess accurately the impact in rural areas. Every dollar borrowed will directly or indirectly generate the same dollar matching its interests. Admit since this simple calculation applied to most of our projects questioned their funding arrangements. Admit so it is not healthy that the country into debt vis-à-vis the outside to pay local wages it will pay off.

It is important that our planning is centralized because it is a national coordination tool strategies and programs and projects derived therefrom, a harvesting tool of statistical data as well as a forecasting tool and perspective. But it is important that also be regionalized planning. But it is important that it takes into account the specific agro-climatic regions, their differences and complementarities.

This brings me to another aspect of planning. The debate about this often appear to the uninitiated entirely made airtight. Besides even insiders can use the same words without speaking the same language. I can not accept that the documents released to the public use of senior administration officials responsible for the cell committees, contractors to their employees, make reference to concepts that are not clearly understood. Planning is the business of all because it concerns all of us. It should make us see what our society project in the short and medium term and it must make us understand the actions or effort is expected of each of us. From this point of view, the planning has an undeniable educational role.

Several times in my previous remarks, I indicated what should be the guidelines of the Fourth Plan. To compensate for the shortcomings and stiffness of previous plans, it will be this time to design the plan in terms of national strategies and not on sectoral policies. This will be beyond the narrow and restrictive vision of the sectors to incorporate cross-sectoral dimension, stop operational strategies that will have the advantage of thoughts in all their concrete implications, financial commitments, their actions or translation national, regional geographical level, municipal level as either instrumental training components, self-organization of labor, technology, etc ...

It seems to me infinitely more interesting and useful to have a few large national strategies in the most important areas that want to cover miles and fields in a superficial way. Indeed, it would last that directly concerned officials finally understand that by talking big national strategies must necessarily speak of the various sectors, but then efforts should be directed in these areas so that their contribution to this or that great national strategy is not the result of good friendly academic theories, but untied from reality.

For example if we had a large national health strategy, it would be obvious that progress can be made in this area would depend largely on what would be done in the field of nutrition (1), the water, sanitation, housing ... should therefore be a priority as we identify actions in these segments based primarily national health strategy, which would give any actions in these sectors their justification. This does not mean that other actions in these areas can not be launched, but what is important is that we do not neglect the essential and vital contribution of these sectors to this or that great national strategy.

It is this consistency between sectors and their contribution to such a large national strategy that will both:

optimize our efforts based on genuine national priorities have thus been defined by mutual agreement and allow to make intelligent tradeoffs based, useful; because as it will not be possible to do everything, what will be done will depend on our ability to do so and our national priorities.

Such a way of thinking our planning will also allow us not deceive anyone, nor on what is possible to do or what absolutely must be made, under the requirement of realism already repeatedly postulated. Such a way of thinking our planning will mobilize excellence by each of us, regardless of its responsibilities - the mother facing her child, the official face his charge, the chosen face with its mandate, the mayor face his town ... - to measure progress, period after period, month after month, I would be tempted to say. It is necessary that we finally understand what is required.

Militants,

If we insisted on presenting acquired in various vital sectors of our country is to demonstrate once again that in his desire to spread as smoothly as possible the benefits of progress through public investment, the Government ensured, with particular attention that the principle of regional balance, said the manifesto of the MRND, is respected as far as possible.

We must not forget that in terms of equitable distribution of projects, long-term trends are more significant than the short observation period. In addition, major national interests take precedence over particularistic concerns too.

Thus, according to these principles, a growing proportion of the investments was therefore oriented function of vital interests of the country, and this with the concensus of the entire nation, without any other consideration.

We have tried to demonstrate how concrete policy responded to this fundamental principle, which we all cherish and we constantly repeat - not for arithmetical reasons or susceptibilities resented, but under our conviction that our survival as a nation depends on the equitable and harmonious way in which progress, including modernization spread throughout our territory.

Thus, all Prefectures today have at least one major project as part of the diversification of export products, which give our farmers and our farmers a non-negligible cash income. In addition, the maximum exploitation of the potential of coffee zones has not been neglected; the intensification of this culture was an important component of agricultural projects Mayaga - Bugesera of Icyanya, Kibungo and the Lake Kivu.

Similarly, according to its own agro-climatic characteristics and availability of arable land, each prefecture has participated and continue to participate in the goal of better promotion of its food production potential: Cyangugu, Butare, Gitarama, Kigali, Kibungo Byumba and grow rice, Ruhengeri, Kibuye, Gisenyi and Gikongoro grow wheat, sugar Nyabarongo valley provides cane and soon others products. large livestock breeding projects develop at Rusumo in Bugesera in Songa, in Mutara, near Gishwati and in the area of ​​agro-pastoral Nyabisindu project. The development of small livestock is based in turn on the centers of production and distribution in Kigali, Butare, Ruhengeri and Cyangugu. Fisheries projects have settled wherever the potential proved interesting.

Militants,

This brief list, by way of illustration, the policy of our Government's regionalization investment demonstrates, I think, very clear that the pursuit of national objectives has not been detrimental to the search for solutions to specific problems of each region. Thus, diversification of export crops has provided opportunities for cash income to people who do not have. Similarly, the development of new lands in the Mayaga, Bugesera, the Icyanya, Mutara, regions Rusumo of Migongo and Zaire-Nile Ridge helped disgorge crowded areas; thus, these projects have not only benefited the prefectures where they are located, but also to those who provided the population migrations, thus easing the pressure on their own land. This example in particular shows very well how, in what spirit we intend to conduct our regionalization policies.

I'll come back here on what I've said about habitat, water and energy, as well as transport and communication infrastructure.

In other areas, such as the distribution of secondary schools and hospitals, still recognized today imbalances will gradually Reduce, with the resources we have. This will be the next big task to Congress that substantially reduce or at least mitigate, the objective disparities can still be found, for the consideration of problems specific to each region, and our will to fairly distribute the benefits of development are an ever living reality of our future.

Militants,

During 1984, we have improved and perfected our institutions by reviewing the structures and organizational charts of the central administration, appointing 600 new and young cadres to important positions of responsibility, creating the Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committees and developing for some departments task cards.

The restructuring of the Central Administration clarified the role of leaders and their agents, to define the limits of skills and services to revitalize the administration by placing it face its responsibilities. Now it is possible to take stock of this restructuring. It is possible to see that the effectiveness of many services has been increased, as the paralyzing spray responsibilities in certain sectors has given way to a spirit of positive decision.

Similarly, the simultaneous allocation of yuppies and well prepared to senior administrative positions and the return of experienced executives to head research centers, offices, public institutions, etc ... had overall positive effects on the flow of business processing and decision making.

The Interministerial Coordinating Committees for their part have proved the original consultation and effective instruments against unilateral decisions adopted coterie confidential. The seriousness and enthusiasm with which the members of C.I.C. conduct analyzes problems, lead discussions on major issues before them and make the decisions, sufficiently prove that this instrument complements esentiel our administrative institutions. It is by design that the ICC have been defined for areas that are transdisciplinary by nature, transcendent, affecting the mandates of more than one department at a time, while the latter were organized around major vital sectors of our country , our economy, our society.

As for sheets of scheduled tasks for all departments, the first are being finalized. Their preparation takes longer than expected, but it is important that consultation process, which some officials were obviously accustomed war, sometimes asking them difficulties of adaptation, lead to a work program well identified, but flexible, so that the Ministry of the Presidency can fulfill its mandate that provides, among other things, coordinating the entire gouvernemantale machine to monitor the progress of operations, control of the progress in implementation of the directives.

Without this, Militants, it is no longer possible to ensure the coherence necessary for good management of the state.

I do not however cover. Militants, that these first two years of operation of our Central Administration reorganized also allowed us to identify a number of centers of weakness, which, I hasten to say, do not take to the new structure as such - it is here to stay; it is proven - but a number of attitudes and approaches that have some officials did not use wisely the resources at their disposal.

Militants,

To conclude this chapter on our institutions, I would be remiss not to seize once again the opportunity given me here to emphasize the privileged instrument of the Commune, which for us must be the cell based development. We have stopped working for its strengthening it is increasingly able to monitor, control and guide its development. In this perspective, the technical committees can play a decisive role in supporting the Mayors and Councilors of the Sectors.

On the other hand the financial resources of municipalities are often thin, very thin. With so few resources, it is unrealistic to imagine that the Municipality to achieve its full autonomy. It seems to me that one of the keys of municipal autonomy and its own grip is its finance and its accessibility to credit.

I therefore insist that much work reflection is immediately undertaken with the objective of cleaning up municipal finances and improving the functioning of the Municipal Development Fund.

We are now at an important crossroads, even decisive: the future of our country, considered all of our families, our regions, our prefectures, mainly depend on its ability to enhance its components, and among which are, first of all, the Commons. It is in the Commons as we live our most crucial problems: food, health, education, etc ...; it is at the Commons that we will find the solutions to these problems: food self-sufficiency, youth employment, wealth accumulation ... Strengthening our Communities, even at the expense, if any, the central government is a vital task and this time a sine qua non of our national development condition.

In the thirty months that separate us from the next Congress, we will engage with all our strengths and resources to create the necessary foundation for the growth in strength, solid, carrying future of our municipalities. We wish that the debates of this Congress effectively help inspire government officials in this view.

The Municipality must now be thinking not only as a political-administrative entity but also as socio-economic reality very, very close and as an expression of our emotional environment.

Militants,

You will recall that during the Fourth Congress, the problems of youth had caught our attention. Congress also had it recommended that the Government continue its Youth mentoring program deschooled and not educated, include civic and patriotic education by encouraging young people to participate more in the development of the country. The Congress also recommended that the Government support the prefectures in their efforts to develop sports facilities and establish a law on sports and recreation.

This is to facilitate the implementation of training programs and the Youth deschooled frame and not educated and to ensure better coordination of all activities of interest to young I wanted all the bodies concerned young people, including the Civic youth Service, are grouped within the Ministry of youth and the Cooperative Movement.

As Congress recommended, Training Centers and school youth and providing technical-school training in the areas of agriculture, livestock, crafts and civic education. After their training, young people are encouraged to form groups in cooperative. The Ministry of Youth and Cooperative Movement periodically develops guidelines for these centers. It provides inspection and control management.

The IVth Congress of recommendations for sports and recreation have been followed and have yielded significant results. The construction of stadiums Gisenyi and Cyangugu is completed, the construction of those Byumba and Ruhengeri is nearing completion and construction of those Gikongoro and Gitarama will start soon. The bill on sports and recreation is over.

The result of these achievements is encouraging, but admittedly, Militants, it responds very, very partial to the fundamental and legitimate needs and the immense aspirations of our youth.

It is important to better understand the problems faced by youth if we want to help clearly identify actions likely to mobilize in making our young players in our development. The study on the evaluation and restructuring of young yards and Socio-Economic Groups in this regard will be extremely useful. This kind of study should continue.

I would like to briefly address a few aspects that can constitute in the future as many lines of actions in favor of youth. These aspects relate to:

the organization of production and craft service; Access to the practice of sports; access to information; the role of centers created for young or frequented by young people; financing activities and facilities for young people.

A thorough analysis of business sectors where young people could play a role, should be systematically conducted at the municipal level. It would determine the different phases of the production process and would assess the mobilizing capacity, in terms of jobs, every action the actual production or crafts service. Note that each phase of the production process is theoretically generate employment; information-forming frame-molding tools or equipment installation, procurement, production, processing, routing-distribution. Note also that the range of activities is extremely wide in the only areas of agricultural production and animal husbandry and processing, production of construction materials and furniture equipment. Every town, every sector, every hill should be the environment of choice an attractive productive activity for young people.

The immense thirst for learning and always learn more about our country and the world pushes our youth to consider access to printed information in general and newspapers in particular, as an exceptional privilege. We need this privilege extends, generalizes, become a right for all. That is why we consider that the first step could be the creation of public reading rooms in the prefectures and sub-prefectures. In addition, the role of information is to be of service to a massive mobilization of our youth towards productive activities proving promoteuses or already being tested elsewhere in the country. This promotional role of information, this source of hope it represents, are inseparable from the task of inventorying all the potentialities of activities in which our youth can and should flourish.

The practice of sports since they develop in young self-discipline, self-control, teamwork, respect for the opponent - this is called the spirit of sport - is a way ideal of promoting young people's physical and mental development. All municipalities must develop sports facilities but across their means. Much of the sports equipment, gymnastics and athletics can be made on site, specifically by young craftsmen workshops we want so proliferate in rural areas.

All centers created for young or frequented by youth (CFJ, EC RAI CCDFP CSD) are the ideal places for reflection on the problems of youth. It is symptomatic that young people are selected volunteer facilitators at the same level of sectors. The convergence of the Government's efforts to equip the municipalities of certain social infrastructure and the efforts of young people who tend to spontaneously associate and organize themselves could significantly strengthen the role of these centers where youth finds and turn them into places creativity.

The stumbling block of all for youth initiatives is the extreme scarcity of budgets allocated to it. It is undoubtedly important that the first step is accomplished by young people, to prove their ability to organize, their motivations to undertake maturity address the problems of development, but it is also important that an effort be made to a larger portion of the state budget is facing actions in favor of youth. Investing in youth is not that invest for the future? It is when these conditions are met as we can to convince our foreign friends to book a significant part of their selfless assistance to groups of young people in public. Similarly, I am convinced that our many friends nongovernmental organizations will be very sensitive to our arguments. It is not inconceivable to imagine now that our cooperation policy postulate that a certain percentage of funds necessarily channeled into actions promoting young people, and this basically at our municipalities.

Activists, Activists M.R.N.D.

External relations are an area that is of significant importance in the overall policy of our country, a policy whose fundamental objective is the promotion of development.

In this context, foreign policy as Rwanda seeks to lead is mainly focused on the search for ways and means to mobilize still further to the benefit of our people, the solidarity of friendly countries and international organizations, as part of bilateral and multilateral cooperation. This proves a necessity almost vital for our country, as indispensable complement in relation to our own development efforts, laudable efforts but whose positive impact is limited by the structural constraints of our economy.

The Rwanda intends to integrate cooperation and development aid among the major objectives of the foreign policy inspired by the principles of reference issued by the Manifesto of the MRND, in the ethical and moral codified by International Organizations our country is a member, including the UN, the OAU and the Movement of Non-Aligned countries.

Our foreign policy is thus centered on solidarity and complementarity between the acting people. This factor remains bound for Rwanda, the constant desire to achieve its objectives of good neighborliness and all-round opening towards all-loving country like ours, peace, freedom, progress and justice.

This desire is marked by the desire to promote a fruitful and successful cooperation, ever more active and active, with our neighbors, with other countries in search of development and in general, with all countries that show a willingness to actually be Rwanda's partners in external relations based on the ideals which joins the entire international community, focusing in this regard on promoting a generator friendship active solidarity in the promote socio-economic progress.

The fundamental options adopted by our foreign policy countries stem from this policy characterized by constant reference to good neighborliness and openness to the world, with a view to consolidating and increasingly develop cooperation with our success in promoting development remain largely dependent.

On many occasions, including at the Fourth National Congress of the MRND, I had the opportunity to emphasize that the recorded results demonstrate, if proof were needed, that our options in this regard are meaningful and appreciated as such by our partners .

I welcome this and I want again. Militants of the MRND, to express, on your behalf, our feelings deep and sincere gratitude to all friendly countries and all international bodies by which our foreign policy has a really positive outcome, on all levels and especially in the part of the mobilization of contributions we need as an essential support to support our own efforts in the implementation and execution of our development projects and programs.

On the occasion of this foundation, the National Congress will appreciate this statement in reference to the decisions and resolutions that had been adopted by the same body in June 1983. These positive results will strengthen the resolve to continue to conduct a diplomacy whose mission remains that strengthen the gains on its assets and the impact of external relations orientated towards the fundamental principles of our overall policy to which the objectives of peace and development are clearly highlighted.

With this in mind, the National Congress will vote on proposed resolutions that are part of a perspective of continuity: continuity under the sign and seal of dynamism; continuity combined with the active search for initiatives to foster always positive developments in the implementation of the objectives of our foreign policy.

Militants,

I wish you fruitful debates in the discipline and democracy. Let us not just to cram multiple resolutions. But let's see together what is really feasible by the next Congress. So we can adapt the stages of our development to the volume of available means. Thus we can reaffirm our faith in the unity of all Rwandan and all Rwandans in the M.R.N.D. for the progress of each of us.

I declare open the work of the Fifth National Congress Ordinary M.R.N.D.

Long live M.R.N.D. Long live the people of Rwanda.

