Rwandans, Dear friends of Rwanda,

It is with great joy that I address today in this last day of 1985, you, Militants, you always friends of Rwanda since 1985 this has been for all of us, a year full of meaning, a year of jubilee symbol and since we could celebrate in joy but in simplicity, as it should, the tenth anniversary of our National Rally for unity, peace and progress that is the National Revolutionary Movement for Development.

This year, 1985, in fact, we have not only allowed to look back on ten years of what can only be called a remarkable period of stability, peace and economic and social progress but also to evaluate, to critically, but constructively, the work accomplished by the efforts of each of each of us.

This year 1985 has also provided us the basis of this substantial reflection, fundamental, which encourages us to consider the next decade of M.R.N.D., with confidence, enthusiasm and renewed vigor.

If 1985 should probably be placed, for Rwanda, under the banner of the 10th anniversary of the MRND, and its Fifth Congress which has just ended, and which will be crowned somehow this year, we have given, as such, all of us cause for satisfaction and hope.

But beyond this collective joy it afforded us, 1985 will however have to all of us, on the personal and family level, on the friendships and professional relationships, brought its share of joy and contentment, but also its share of sacrifices, disappointments, sadness.

With all my heart, Rwandans, I hope that the reasons for happiness, satisfaction, joy you will have more marked that the inevitable moments of distress and discouragement.

The circumstances did. Activist: Activists and that throughout this year I had the opportunity to speak to you on several occasions. In March, I spoke to you through our craftsmen on whose shoulders rests and always rely more an important part, and promising for our future, and whose enthusiasm we had many hit. I learn with pleasure that the craft sector is expanding in many parts of the country. This promises well for our future.

In July, on the occasion of the 10th anniversary of M.R.N.û., we extensively reviewed the progress made since ten years in the various sectors of national life, and the problems and deadlines to face in the coming years. I had so much insisted on the five major parameters determining our action, five major areas that will continue to retain the essence of our policy, namely:

the field of justice and the rule of law, where laws are respected, where the individual enjoys all rights, where public freedoms are guaranteed, where security is ensured for all citizens, day and night; the field of economic policy based on a true self-development, endogenous, taking its source in the forces of our country, in our culture, in the valuation of our own resources, material progress and spiritual understanding of our people ; the déinographico-food sector, namely the insured maintaining the balance between whether rapid increase of our population and food supply, particular problems of our country; socio-ecological area, which consists in the constant strengthening of the balance that must exist between the improvement of living standards of our people, and the protection of our resource base, one that should not be at the expense of the other; the field of organization of the living forces of our country, demanding to put everything in place and any action to ensure that the aspirations of our people, its dynamism, its creative ability can manifest, to externalize, to shine.

This striking manifestation of the forces of our country has experienced this year its peak in December, with the organization and holding of the Fifth Congress of the foundations of our National Revolutionary Movement for Development.

I will not come back. Militants on everything we have said, what I said when opening or closing the Fifth Congress of M.R.N.D., came at a particularly significant moment for our country.

Let me tell you just yet once how we proved to ourselves and to the world the living reality of our young democracy where everyone's commitment to us, the spirit of critical participation, but how constructive , was matched by our commitment to all of us to work in the best interest of Rwanda.

Before you turn the page of 1985, I would be remiss not to mention another event to which we attach particular importance: I mean the City Summit of Heads of State of the Economic Community of Great Lakes Countries held there about a month.

The commitment of our country to this young and dynamic country Brothers Community, faced substantially the same problems, has been rewarded by the significant results achieved at the Summit of Gisenyi. I like to make you succinctly stock in what he has behaved most promising:

the adoption of a solemn declaration reaffirming the principles of solidarity and security among member states; the signing of the Convention on the free movement of persons, goods, services and capital and the right of establishment; reaffirmation to focus Community activities primarily on economic sectors (food and agriculture, industry and tourism, trade and services, transport and communications ...) parallel to the development of cooperation in priority areas of safety and immigration, employment and social security, education and scientific research; strengthening the Development Bank of the Great Lakes States (BDEGL) to enable the institution to operationalize community programs and projects.

There is no doubt, Militants, that to thrive, the Rwandan economy needs, such as those of neighboring countries to integrate more and more in regional assemblies promising. The Summit City will be contributed effectively, as there have also contributed our efforts this year, particularly in the context of O.B.K., PTA, and C.E.E.A.C.

Militants,

At the dawn of this year 1986, I would like to extend to all my fellow citizens, all Rwandan and all Rwandans, all Militantes and all Activists, my warmest wishes for this new year it is also a year of peace and national concord, a year of prosperity for all of us, for the future of our children are insured and we can continue to improve their lives, patiently but surely.

At the dawn of 1986, I also expressed, on behalf of all the Activists and all the militants of our National Revolutionary Movement for Development, to all members of the Diplomatic and Consular Corps, their families and their fellow citizens, as well as highly respected countries and their leaders, they represent the Republic of Rwanda, my best wishes and warmest of peace, happiness and prosperity.

I include in my greeting all aid workers, all volunteers, all the religious and all the missionaries and all our foreign friends who work in our country on private and official plan, or in non-governmental organizations.

I would like to extend a fraternal message of friendship and particularly warm wishes to the peoples and their distinguished and respected heads of state of the countries surrounding Rwanda, for the coming year, a new proof of the strength of the regional agreement so vital for our survival to all.

Militants,

Before placing 1986 under the motto that guides our inspiration for agricultural policies of our country, I want to quickly say a few words on a theme that is particularly dear to me and which in 1986 will mobilize amount of our efforts : preparing our next plan.

It is important that the new plan, the fourth, meets our aspirations and expectations. It has to be a useful, operational plan, according to our means, so a feasible, transparent.

We must therefore change the reference paradigm for the next plan and retain past experiences that what is really useful.

To respond to the needs of the times, the next plan should be designed in terms of national strategy in a limited number of areas, but considered in the current circumstances as the most important. Our next plan will be primarily focused on food self-sufficiency strategy taken in its broadest sense, based itself on the underlying strategies.

In addition, it will follow a realistic economic program which is based partly on a rigorous management of our resources and especially government debt, and, secondly, our ability to control our development, and especially on the priorities stemming requirements and deadlines macroeconomic.

Finally, it should take into account the contribution of each agro-climatic regions to national wealth, as well as their specificities, their differences and complementarities; it will take and the next plan is increasingly rooted in our communities.

The main directions of the next expected shortly Plan and will respond to the new life of planning as we know it for a truly endogenous development and self-centered.

Militants,

In the center of the challenges we hear up, cope with population growth and fragmentation of our land, facing the overload of these lands and the scarcity of new agricultural areas, there is food self-sufficiency of our country. It is a constant in our policy that we intend to reaffirm any time.

As I said before, the first condition for better development is that the economy is able to meet before anything else, the material needs and spiritual base of the population, and primarily able to feed his subjects, through its own resources. In our situation, there is no realistic and consistent option but to intensify our agricultural production in general and our food production in particular.

That's why 1986 is called "YEAR OF INCREASED AGRICULTURAL."

Agricultural intensification means use of manure and fertilizers, Agriculture and Livestock Association, use of selected seeds.

It means erosion control - I hope that by 1988 we have completely finished, all over the country, all work related to the protection of soils.

The Minister of Agriculture, Livestock and Forestry will give more detailed guidance.

Again, it is the peasant and the Rwandan peasant who will be the main actors of our development. It is they who will always be the object of our major concerns and our greatest concern.

It is for the apparatus of the State (Central and Decentralized Administration) in the Public Establishments and thematic projects and integrated development to be at their service to provide them the means to achieve the goals set by our auto policy food-sufficiency.

Rwandans, Dear friends of Rwanda,

Again, accept my best wishes for your health and that of your children.

To all, Happy New Year 1986.

