Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, supporters, sympathizers,

It gives me great pleasure to be with you and I wish you the most cordial welcome to you and to all our friends, often from far away, to make us the honor of their presence how popular among us.

On your behalf, I wish to solemnly renew the warmest and sincere thanks to the President of the Republic of Tanzania, Ali Hassan Mwinyi Ndugu, currently on an official visit to our country.

His presence among us, in joy and rejoicing of the feast, to which he agreed to participate, is highly significant as a striking testimony to the quality and character of copies of friendship and cooperation relations between brotherly Tanzania and Rwanda.

These relationships are constantly reinforced through active solidarity and effective complementarity, concrete expressions of the neighborhood policy in which both our countries attach fundamental importance.

Thus, the Rwanda-Tanzania cooperation is active and effective in many areas, including I may quote the transportation and communications, the trade and the areas covered by the Cultural and Technical Cooperation.

His presence in Rwanda, an official visit, thus confers a relief and a special shine to our joy in this day of celebration, and we welcome him as the leading representative of a sister nation, the State Head of a country with which Rwanda is pleased to maintain, on the basis of exemplary friendship, fruitful and successful cooperative relationship.

Today Militants, we are exactly halfway of the Island legislature we inaugurated, in joy, but in simplicity, here two and a half, on 8 January 1984.

That day, we rejoiced that all the presidential and legislative elections were held in a climate of peace and understanding; we saw it all, an eloquent sign of the maturity acquired by the Rwandan people and a promising guarantee for the future of our people, now ready to devote the best of its forces to its self-reliance.

The same day, on the occasion of the swearing in of the President of the Republic and the opening of the Island legislature of the National Development Council, we placed government action under the symbol of rigor and consultation. Rigor and consultation - two major virtues which, more than any other, allow good management of state affairs and ensuring the rational use of our resources for a self-development well understood.

It seems to me entirely appropriate and timely, on this solemn day each year is July 5, triple anniversary of our national independence, the advent of the Second Republic and the founding of the MRND, to, now halfway through, the point of this Parliament.

This will situate ourselves in relation to what we tried to put in place, compared to our expectations and our hopes; it will also allow me to strengthen, where necessary, guidance and reaffirm, if necessary, our priorities for this term, decisive for our future, really meets the needs of the times and the promises it has given rise.

In my keynote I told you, Militants, that confidence you gave me so massively and so warmly granted was for me the best support in the heavy load you then come to renew myself, support none, but also the guarantee that together we progress towards "development".

You certainly remember too Militants from the direct appeal, without exception, I then started to you all, aware that I was aware that I am always, how each of us must work incessantly and with all necessary sacrifice for the good of all our people, that all of us work in a spirit of rigor and consultation, where it is in the RWANDA interest for the future of our youth.

Expectations impatiens has raised new Parliament inaugurated with enthusiasm and a strong, new impetus - these expectations so that I could read on the faces of our farmers, our farmers, our youth, wherever I went - hope unwavering that I placed personally in this legislature II, seem all the more justified since the advent of the Second Republic our country experienced an enviable period of peace, stability and hence progress socioeconomic noticed, and we were able to build the political institutions such as the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, the National Development Council, and that other institution, the capital, became the foundation of a large part of progress done for 10 years, i mean the UMUGANDA.

All these institutions show us almost every day and often brilliantly, their merits, their justification.

Everything is in place, the institutional perspective and the democratic functioning of our country and other preconditions, that we we launched, bringing together all our strength and all our will and all our enthusiasm in the fight for self-reliant development of our country, that we devote our best efforts to self-understanding of RWANDA.

Speaking of self-development, which must be rooted in our own strength, in the bowels of our own social body, I had you then said, Militants, "it was no longer possible for specific actions, or by reform in pieces. Only, - I said - "the definition and implementation of comprehensive strategies, integrated policies, concerted and coherent programs will enable us to meet the demands of our time." And I added: "Effective management of the structural transformation of our economy, and our society, is the price."

Allow me. Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, today at "halftime" of this Parliament, to examine critically and without complacency, what we have accomplished in our policies, achieving our objectives in our path towards self-development, to identify, if any, the gray areas and denounce, if necessary, the weaknesses that persist even in order to offer you, Militants, adjustments and the adjustments that are needed.

Militants, this term is decisive; if we do not réussisons now to successfully negotiate the dangerous curves ahead of us, we'll miss the turn, we will be overwhelmed, and overwhelmed; and lost time, we can never catch up, as it is true that the challenges will eventually crush us; our children, our youth, the future of our country would suffer irreparably - yes, hopelessly!

That's why I'm drawn to me, with force, from the first days of this Parliament, to implement this essential tool, the strike force, which only allow the President of the Republic, ie of at head of Government to assume its responsibilities for public affairs manager, namely, "a central, reformulated and revitalized, where responsibilities are clearly defined, where dialogue is institutionalized, where dossier evaluation is facilitated, and where the instructions are carried out quickly. "

In political self-development that deserves its name, public administration must be up to the task! The coherence, rigor, consistency of objectives and national development strategies depend. As also depend on two key factors when it comes to self-development: the dignity of the country, and credibility!

It is in this sense that the new government was in place. He first had fewer ministries - austerity oblige - but departments on the basis of experience, has been "reworked based on criteria of efficiency, organic and consistent distribution of sectoral mandates, while the consultation was institutionalized, through the Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committees, themselves designed based on transcendent areas, affecting the vocation of several ministries. " (12/31/84).

For over two years I regularly returned to this central theme, urging everyone to intensely live the values ​​that inspired the administrative reform.

I told you, Militants, addressing myself in particular to those who have the privilege of being employed by the Government, exercising our duties to the best of our conscience, and provide the best of our efforts, that - I will say enough - that this, we need all of our farming families who, in fact, are our true employers, because it is thanks to them and their work that the state can work, and it ' is putting in place a genuine development administration that we respond as surely their expectations. " (5.7.84)

The time has come now for me to wonder if the central government operates according to the principles highlighted, if it fulfills the tasks entrusted to it, if it really has become the instrument par excellence for governance which I referred to the hour.

The time has come for you to make, if only partially, account.

I am pleased to see that real progress has been made in several areas. Despite starting a little rough - it is not easy to quickly change some attitudes often made of comfort and laziness - I note with pleasure that many officials are working hard, with great dedication, spending themselves selflessly to fulfill their duties conscientiously. I note, for example, with joy, that for months, agents spend every Saturday and Sunday at the office, because their work interested, passionate, since they know that maintaining the balance of our balance payments depends precisely on their search parameters to control in our policy regarding the management of our imports.

Many officials, and deserve to be, are empowered and know that it is only if they work well and faithfully that the state will gradually improve their material situation. I would like to congratulate them warmly and sincerely.

Similarly, several ministry officials in turn provide visible efforts to advance the cause of which they are responsible, in spite of the material means and often very limited human resources. They also know how the future of our country depends on the work they do every day; to them also goes our sincere gratitude.

But my satisfaction is not complete; on the contrary, I am very disappointed with several aspects of the functioning of the administration. I am disappointed by the attitude of the administration officials who exhaust their energies in administrative routines, automatically providing unjustified promotions, distributing free coasts "ELITE" agents they immediately rush to propose the "REVOCATION" because that nobody wants.

Beyond certain unavoidable weaknesses, lack of running, all things natural, since nothing is perfect in this world, beyond some shortcomings, I am disappointed by the distraction of some officials, distraction nothing justifies that nothing can excuse; I am disappointed with some bad intentions, perhaps even bad faith among some officials; there is also such an effort, systematically, to consider the instructions, the guidelines defined, not as something that binds the one concerned, but more like wishful thinking, from an instance which some would float well -Dessus everyday problems, such as wishes which bind person, the aesthetic manifestations, literature perhaps! These are the reasons for my disappointment.

Last December, at the opening of the Fifth Congress of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, I warned very clear, stating in particular that "the first two years of operation of our reorganized central administration have allowed us to identify a number of weaknesses in centers that do not fit in the new structure as such - it is here to stay; it is proven - but a number of attitudes and approaches that have some officials did not use wisely the resources at their disposal. " (12/23/85)

This warning does not seem to have been heard by all that concerned. Today, six months later, the situation has even worsened.

It is with bitterness that I have seen. Militants, you who had given me your trust for me is a government team at the height of his duties, to you I say, it is with bitterness that I have seen that the team as a whole did not meet all the expectations that I have placed in it.

I refuse to generalize and condemn outright. Instead, the shadows seem perhaps even stronger than elsewhere the light is brighter. And I had the opportunity to highlight the sacrifice of so many officials and clerks of the state, large and small.

But I keep surprising myself by noting that it is often those departments that have relatively few staff and few executives who have received extensive training that seem to work the best because they are led by a head, by a manager who successful, thanks to the cooperation and encouragement unabated, stimulate and whose enthusiasm and dedication are above all considerations politician and above all suspicion of acquiring illegal benefits, and n 'have in mind that the exciting task to which they have the honor of working, namely, the future of our country, the future of our children.

There are others, alas, whose management is as an obstacle to the progress of our self-development; blocking important issues and where there are many directions and various initiatives that there are officials. There are even some that one wonders which you have to wonder if they have understood the tasks, mandate, priorities that we have entrusted their January 8, 1984 ...

Some officials are able to operate in an exemplary manner, their Interministerial Committee for Coordination and for whom the desire to dialogue is not an empty word, but a reality really lived, every day, for them and their employees, they are aware that it is only through dialogue, through the exchange of ideas and experiences, by using all the skills that it is possible for them to fulfill their tasks in a useful way and effective in the interest of our country.

There are others, however, who seems barely know their Interministerial Coordination Committee exists and is there to be used, it is there to serve as a forum for policy development, strategies to provide a forum where the positions can be harmonized for the benefit of the progress of cases, and the credibility of RWANDA.

There are still others who use their Interdepartmental Coordinating Committee as to seek any coverage for their wrong decisions, or use the CIC to cover their own small projects that have nothing to do with the national interest.

Militants,

If I insist so much on this first major theme of this Parliament - the establishment of a central, redesigned, and development-oriented, and that works efficiently and quickly - is that I consider this set of a dynamic administration as a prerequisite, essential for our country to move forward.

We must therefore consider the decisions necessary for a rapid improvement to sanitation operation of public administration.

This is to prepare the decisions that I propose to make visits during the year 1986 - 1987, with all the agents of the Public Service to better empower and improve with them consistency public service.

I planned three visits spaced over several months, which will allow me to meet all the officials and talk to them both about their problems, but also about their responsibilities and how to improve the functioning of the Rwandan administration. These are not ministries that I visit, but the agents gathered in three groups according to the areas of their assignment.

The first group will include the ministries gathered around the theme of "food self-sufficiency and human resources," the second will bring together the ministries whose mandates touch on "macroeconomic and infrastructure," while the third group will be the one of " public administration and policy and coherence. "

This distribution will allow state agents to rank better about the positions they hold, to better grasp and understand the context in which they are called to work for the common good.

And these meetings, we must prepare now. Now, the cells were invited to prepare, in writing, and through free debate, concerns and problems they see, or in the operation of their work, either in terms of administrative matters, or on that of tasks and challenges they face.

It would be better that this document, which should reach me before my visit, so I can prepare accordingly, be drafted so that it allows an input material effective and reflects a consensus. This document, which will be summarized by a representative of the cells at the beginning of each meeting will be the objective result, uncensored, of course, by any administrative body - the debates that I invite you to take now.

To prevent this document from becoming a barren catalog of complaints, laments and moaning, and that the quality of meetings does being affected, I think you also committed to your side on the solutions to problems you entrevoyiez you listed on the approaches yourself you suggest to address the deficiencies you have identified!

For me, these visits will be an opportunity not only to meet with public officials and to share their problems, but also to inform them of how I see myself some problems and solutions to them, and spend review some of the major themes of the administration and management of public affairs.

These three visits and aim to clarify an unequivocally true ethics - a code of conduct - which must therefore inspire all that is done in the public service, and to establish a coherent approach to modernization and development of the public Service of Rwanda. My duty and my responsibility will lay my turn to find ways to enforce what has been clarified during these debates.

Also as part of the preparation of these visits, I have asked the Minister of the Presidency, one of whose tasks is precisely to ensure, with all due care, that "the reign greater coherence within the administration "to convene the ad hoc Inter-ministerial Committee, which had already led to the implementation of administrative reform, and prepare a detailed report on the current functioning of the administration, its weaknesses, blockages and obstacles to its full capacity, attitudes and harmful conduct that one can see, the reasons that some files are not moving, whether officials are not up to their tasks or too venal, whether decision-making mechanisms ineffective or insufficient means.

The report, to which I give now the greatest importance, I expect the next two months, that is to say shortly before my first visit.

Militants,

If the establishment of a "development administration" that is up to the challenges and works above all suspicion, is indeed the first step in any self development well understood, equal importance should be given the content of the policies that will now animate and service which it must work.

On 8 January 1984 I gave pride of place to the various tasks to different mandates, different priorities that I expected to see the new ministries and their leaders address immediately.

Two areas occupied a privileged position from the outset: the economic policy of self-reliance and food self-sufficiency, that is to say, the rural world.

I devoted the speech of 5 July 1984 to the economic problems and economic reforms essential to both improve the situation and prepare for economic recovery on a sound and solid foundation.

At the same time, I outlined the necessary contours of an economic policy centered primarily on increasing purchasing power, particularly in rural areas, priority of priorities, I said then; again, I addressed the imperatives of rural industrialization understood the problems of craftsmanship, mentioning already that if imperfectly called "informal sector"; I also gave instructions regarding the Agricultural Policy, and mentioned many other things.

An important part of my thoughts were devoted to macroeconomic problems because sound macroeconomic management, determines everything else. It is mainly demonstrated by how a country maintains and reinforces some of the fundamental balances of the national economy and the way it reports its external economic relations to the logic of national interests, not to that we offers to the outside or that one sometimes tries to impose, by reference to criteria that have nothing to do with the national reality.

Another essential element to control in any self-development, is external indebtedness, because the real self-development requires that ultimately people depend on its own decisions: genuine independence of a people, the ultimate guarantor of dignity, Militants, is to depend on its own decisions!

That is why it is essential to give our state a sufficient margin of maneuver financial and economic, to have resources that will not be amputated by impossible commitments to bear, mortgaging our freedom of action and linking hands and feet our future generations.

Finally, the consolidation of the economy, and the subsequent recovery, required the rapid implementation of certain reforms. I, 5 July 1984 already presented the broad parameters of this consolidation, such as revising our tariff and tax policies and other legal requirements, trade policy, the Investment Code, municipal finances, fiscal policy .

For two and a half years, I have missed no opportunity to return to the topic of the economic policies of self-reliance, repeating the same priorities and the same tasks, but by examining each time from a different angle, while the placing ever in the context of our policy guidance, and repeating the same orders and the same instructions.

I think so, Militants, I went as far as a President of the Republic can go without giving the impression that he must constantly replace ministerial responsibilities that do not always see well captured and understood by officials directly concerned, but yet far enough up to mobilize the forces of our country recognizes the responsibilities that are his to inspire the Government to lead the way, so that it can assume its responsibilities Head of state, fully, knowingly, and be accountable to the vast majority of our country, to our farmers, our farmers and their families, to young people who must lead the way to the future and that it must establish that it takes for this future is comforting, that of hope.

Today, two and a half years exactly after the definition and explanation of our priorities and our approaches to economic policy, what is the reality of their implementation? What have we been able to achieve our economic program?

What is the step we have taken to restore our economy an acceptable cruising, sure that sanitation postulated could be carried out as planned?

Militants,

I will try to answer these questions with the utmost honesty, to be able to identify the decisions that will be required.

In terms of the macro economic situation, the results seem encouraging. In fact, we managed to recover to a certain extent the necessary fiscal balance, which we are also imposed by our Constitution. But the very commendable efforts must be pursued with all the necessary rigor to control once and for all, the growth of public spending.

This means, firstly, clarifying the potential economic growth rate, which can be granted to the various ministries, and that before they will embark to develop their budgets for the following year.

It also means the establishment of a true multi-year fiscal policy that would allow us to plan intelligently and coherently, the evolution of our public finances. I am told that this multi-year plan is on track. I expect shortly the report on the major parameters.

Our continued efforts in budgetary matters also means that now the budget of the public debt is out of the budget of the Ministry of Finance to become a full budget, and not stay this obscure topic, lost somewhere in the general budget the Ministry of Finance. The control of our debt requires, for reasons of transparency and planning.

I think the depth study of a budget of own debt would, among other things, to make more visible the areas in which the country is in debt.

And a special vote on the budget and the debt would highlight the intimate relationship between certain investments, their impact on other budgets and limited resources available; approval would thus consciously and knowingly causes of all the implications. That would be a powerful incentive to wisdom.

As for the debt itself, I have already sounded the alarm at the opening of the fifth Congress M.R.N.D. when it occurred to me that our debt had reached proposals that worry.

On December 23 last, I asked, and I renew this request, the Department concerned to submit to me the text of a presidential decree that will define, with maximum clarity and the more strictly the rules, criteria selection and prerequisites for entry in on the financial commitment of countries in the future, and the exclusive responsibilities from the Ministry having Finance in its attributions regarding the possible approval of an approach n ' any department or public service to engage the Rwanda financially. Such an order will include the same time, provisions for strengthening, if necessary, the services involved in the management of debt, and stipulate a very precise way, elements such as recurrent costs, the impact on imports, which will now accompany any request for obtaining credit exté-

We will be better able to control, knowingly, this important element of our macroeconomic management, and self-development while respecting.

Another favorable acquired in this context should also be mentioned today: the establishment of our import management policy, which will allow us to visibly slow down the explosive pace that followed them for some time, and inspire judicious substitution policy, as I have had occasion to say it recently in my message artisans, Banques Populaires and responsible for our industrialization policy. (3.4.86)

This program was developed conscientiously; there, and I am convinced of its accuracy but it has to be applied! I appeal to the authorities of the NBR, which are responsible for the management of currency and credit, to ensure, with maximum vigilance and diligence, execution conforms to this vital program, which each year will be defined by an interdepartmental committee.

The Ministry of Finance and Economy should also prepare now, a quarterly report on progress in the control of our imports.

I can tell you. Militants, that soon will start another major effort, bearing also over several years, but in the field of export promotion. The Government will thus have made a serious effort to create the conditions in order to stop the skid our trade balance and that of the services, in order to restore acceptable balance.

Finally, also in terms of the macro economy, we continued to avoid resorting to specious subterfuge for manipulating our currency, despite some urgent injunctions from those we have always regarded as friends bodies. To these friends we reiterate: the

Rwanda always listen with great attention, and with the greatest kindness, all the tips that are so generously lavished upon him. But this is Rwanda, which sets direction of its development. And this will we and our children will have to live with the consequences of those decisions. And not the officials who live thousands of kilometers - and that after a 10-day mission to become specialists in our country, we often seem to be so completely detached from our reality and who so often seek to always apply the same remedy whatever the disease to cure.

Militants,

As you can see for yourselves, we have done since the beginning of this legislature, an important further step towards the preservation and consolidation of our macroeconomic gains. The measures I have announced today will help us even more control over what truly critical area in any policy of self-reliance ..

There is however, one area where there has been no progress at all: it is that the various reforms which I am an advocate for so long. I'd be embarrassed. Militants, if today, after almost three years, and after the nth call I had, once again, apply the urgency of the revision of tariffs, or the development of a new code investments.

None of these texts is still out, or others that we expect for years.

Too much precious time has been wasted and lost forever; our credibility has already suffered enough; the promised revival following the economic reforms, cruelly slow in coming. I do not know if the managers concerned are really sufficiently aware of the extreme urgency of a number of these reforms, if they are really sufficiently aware of the considerable damage they inflict on the national economy through their sway, by their negligence, their corruptibility. I really request.

It is not possible to tamper; that's why I asked the officials concerned to that within 3 months, they show me the report on the completion of the most urgent reforms: the Investment Code, the regulation of trade and prices, tariff reform.

In terms of other needed reforms, there are:

defining our cooperation strategy; there are the problems of integration of our winners CERAI; there is all the legislation on water; the definition of a clear policy for the use of local materials; the reform of higher education; there is the organization of public procurement; the strengthening of the common, the CAP and the reform of the Municipal Development Fund

For all these reforms, and other urgent, a very strict timetable, but reasonable, will be determined jointly by the Minister for the Presidency and the Minister concerned in each case. This will be the only way that will now allow me to assure you, Militants, things done or that such a charge does not provide what it promised.

Some delays are really inexplicable. So I asked the Minister to the Presidency to investigate the reasons for the incredible laxity, sometimes guilty of these distractions. I want to know why files that seemed yet well advanced drag suddenly. I want to know who exactly is still "sitting on the folders", which slows their progress. I want to know how it is possible for trifles, not to lose face, or for any other reason, urgent cases are buried state for years. I want to know why, despite the consensus - minus one - the latter prevails and manages to freeze files.

There is no question that officials distracted, careless or venal, retard the progress of the country. We have no time to lose. This is all the more imperative that the economic outlook is currently among the darkest that we ever had to confront. This requires that everyone be convinced of this urgency-and to act accordingly.

Militants,

The design of self-development, which inspired this Parliament and the corresponding government program is not only focused on the establishment of a genuine development administration and appropriate economic policies; it gives a place as important to meeting conditions to run for a true self-sufficiency of the country.

I have on several occasions expressed my thoughts on this vital aspect of any self-development, namely, a food policy well understood, and have outlined the strategic contours of our national policy on the subject.

I will not go back to what I said - as it is today to take stock of what has been done, not what was said. To better assess what has been done, let me, Militants, to include a brief of what I recently said, speaking to the Rwandan youth, during my visit to National University of Rwanda (21.05.86).

I began by saying this: "If it is true that the first objective that a national economy must aim is to be able to feed the country in whose service it must function and be organized, and s it is true that the top priority of Rwanda, it is precisely to build the national economy around this major imperative is to say, give it a solid foundation enabling it to meet this requirement fundamental, it is essential to be able to identify very clearly some of the key factors that our economy can sustainably achieve the goal of food self-sufficiency understood ... "

And I added: "One of the key factors, and perhaps most important, if it is to produce enough food for all of our people, it is first to allow those who produce our food, namely, our farmers and our peasants, gradually improve their standard of living - their habitat, their health and that of their children, their income so they can buy some goods and send their children to school, access to public facilities! "

In other words, the theme of the increased purchasing power in rural areas acquires its full justification, any scope.

The Government, recognizing the importance for the peasant, the peasant, to obtain really remunerative prices for their products, decided to increase the official prices for most food products; in some cases, the announced increases were significant, but still they have to be practiced, the farmer, the producer, to be able to actually touch the official price!

The effort of the Government was certainly generous, but it soon became clear that the conditions that were to allow higher price goes to the producer were not met, or any action, to accompany the rising prices, would have allowed the producer to defend against rogue traders.

The instructions were given, Militants for the development of measures accompanying called for these measures to come powerfully support the implementation of new agricultural prices.

Obviously remunerative prices are an extraordinary incentive to increase production and rural purchasing power. The State therefore must ensure as far as possible, respect for the floor price set.

Pending the announcement of measures accompanying the rise in prices decreed, I would like now to invite our farmers, our producers, to organize, to join together to defend themselves against unscrupulous traders, and also to facilitate the work the OPROVIA and TRAFIPRO who may visit each farmer to buy his marketable production.

The Government also just increased the producer price of coffee, despite the difficult economic situation, and the significant risk that this increase makes it run. But again, knowing that the coffee are relatively egalitarian income spread over the entire territory, he wanted to show that he is willing to take that risk to allow the farmer who grows some coffee growing, even modestly, its income and encourage to maintain its coffee trees with the utmost care so that they always refer to him.

Today I asked the Director of OCIR- publicly make Café update on the actions taken and planned, even use the radio every day, if necessary, to tell the farmer how he has for sale coffee at the official price of 125 F RW.

Militants,

Major efforts and were therefore significant facts; they are sure to bear fruit.

But in this balance, I can not hide what did not work. All was not perfect, far from it. In particular, our efforts in the field of agribusiness, small and medium scale leaves much to be desired.

If we are to achieve food self-sufficiency objectives and advance in the path of self-development well understood, we must make the most of all the development of recovery and transformation of our agricultural products. This is imperative not only to support continued demand for our agricultural products - which will keep prices at a high level and thus guarantee the policy of rural purchasing power - but also to draw other products , processed, or for the national market or to the regional market, which would also create the productive employment so indispensable in rural areas.

But where is the strategy of inward-looking industrialization and endogenous we keep applying for more than four years?

A first seminar on industrialization that took place earlier this year finally - and quite late - clarified the concepts, objectives and challenges in Rwanda in industrialization.

What worries me, however, strongly, Militants, is that apparently retained approach requires many years to develop, with heavy structures, with many studies that anyway will be externally financed and executed by a large number of international experts. It still could last for years before we aboutissions one day at a concrete realization!

This, Militants, I can not accept it. I quite agree that the ongoing reflection, but today it is equally important that we be as concrete and as constructive as possible.

What seems to me now the most useful, because time - and the peasant who, despite the official price posted is no longer able to sell at a laughable price it no longer continue to produce, if n ' there is not a safe demand for its products - which seems to me the most useful and most urgent is to make maximum efforts for the approach to agribusiness, already well underway and very convincing, either quickly developed. The strategy for agribusiness should be finalized quickly so that it can be discussed in three to four months at the Council of Government. Only in this key strategy will experience a rapid onset of execution and why not be part of the next Plan.

The last element of undeniable political importance, in terms of self-development and food self-sufficiency regarding the promotion of a wide network of productive activities in rural areas especially in our cities, which could and should be done our artisans and our youth, our small and medium entrepreneurs.

I have nothing to add today Militants, to what I said about it recently in my keynote address at the National University of Rwanda, being addressed to me on this occasion our youth. I expect that the initiatives announced start with vigor and enthusiasm soon.

Militants,

Administration development, inward-looking economic policy, food self-sufficiency - these are inseparable concepts of self-development vision that inspires, even more than in the past, since we can now devote all our strength this Parliament.

But these concepts, we must make them operational must make strategies, we must find ways and means to make them functional, we must harmonize our efforts and maximize the use of our resources, we must prioritize our goals and identify what is a priority and what is less so, we must above all build our future on our own strength, our resources and our possibilities.

All this is necessary for reasons of consistency between our goals, to bring order in what we do, internal cohesion, coherence, which will guide us as we can more easily compared to all the challenges we wait.

In saying this, Militants, I want so speak up, I mean planning.

In the vision that animates us and in the arrangement of our goals and strategies of crucial importance is how the Plan, the planning process is conducted.

From December 31, 1984, I am attached to provide a way to design the new plan, a new approach to planning.

I do not want to go back everything I said about it, patiently, so many times, repeating every time some aspects of the new approach postulated, namely, to have a planning tool that is useful, which is based first on our strengths and means, an instrument that is rooted in reality, among the peasants in the communes. A plan, in short, that is within our reach.

This theme particularly dear to me; I even said it a few months ago (12.31.85): "It is important that the new Plan, the fourth, meets our aspirations and expectations. It has to be a useful, operational plan, according to our means, so a realistic plan, transparent. " And I added that another equally important aspect is to design our planning so that it will lure anyone, not on what he can do, not on what absolutely must be done . This way, I said, and I repeat today, such a way to help mobilize excellence by each of us, whatever his responsibilities: mother facing her child, the official face his load, the chosen face with its mandate, the mayor facing his town, and measure progress, period after period, month after month.

We must find a way to do that is ours, and responds to what we have identified as being really useful for what we want to achieve for our self development.

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

Where are we in the preparation of the next Plan, the centerpiece of our efforts for self-development well designed?

We have suffered a serious delay - but a happy late.

Delay happy for two reasons.

First, because, as I have requested, we have time for our next plan, to change the paradigm. This means it will avoid a pale copy of previous plans and retain only what seems useful.

Paradigm shift also means rethinking, probably from top to bottom, the function of our planning, defined according to our interests, to design something new, but it meets our needs today. This means to be creative, innovative, daring, explore, dare.

Is it not true that if these plans are often only an alibi or for cooperation or for international institutions, while the peasant, the mayor, local councilors can go up to ignore a such document exists! While it is precisely the peasant, the mayor, they are the advisers who should run it.

Is it not also true that too often these plans are an amalgam of good ideas, theories, demonstrations, scientific calculations, a project schedule which in most cases are only the idea that often the title.

So change the paradigm, Militants, it's not easy; it is even very difficult. But our next plan is only useful if the approach that has enabled its development responds to a new paradigm.

The original schedule has been disrupted, but that does not matter. It was necessary that we make in the experiment; and it was inevitable that the scope of the meaning of our new approach might appear gradually.

The second reason Militants, why the delay is happy is that, as I have had occasion to say several times already, is that the planning process is inherently more useful , the result. That is to say a document of several hundred pages. And this process is precisely spirit to demonstrate any educational benefit it has identified.

Militants,

We have not lost time with regard to the preparation of the next Plan. I never found much mobilization and awareness that this time, the planning process has succeeded in generating. Are there no ministries that even complain of not having been sufficiently involved and look forward to provide and discuss their contributions to this national food self-sufficiency strategy which will form the body of this fiscal year . This is happy.

It should nevertheless advancing the Fourth Plan preparation process. A draft guidance document is currently available after being discussed in an enlarged Committee - I will decide soon on the next steps.

Militants,

The four main reference topics discussed and deepened since the beginning of this Parliament - public administration, economic policy, planning and food self-sufficiency, and interrelationships that are obvious - are like so many poles directing our self-reliance. But there are others who will be circumstantial interventions at the appropriate time because we want to move slowly and carefully.

These four themes, I have chosen today as the yardstick by which it should measure what was actually accomplished since the beginning of this legislature.

But these four themes will take, can not take their full scale if the forces of the country are theirs; they will have no impact on our development only if they are supported by all the forces of our country.

These forces that bear our future, who are our future.

That's why I'm tied up with conviction and enthusiasm, once the basic tenants of our policy of self-reliance for the present five-year term had been clarified, to vigorously extol the strength of our country. Our forces who will build our future.

The self-development is it not primarily the exaltation of our forces, self-reliance is not this essentially the mobilization of all our forces for development, progress, national control challenges of our country?

The lifeblood of a country is the guarantor of its capacity for innovation, its capacity to organize themselves properly, to find own solutions to its own problems.

So I can not miss a single opportunity to pay tribute to all our forces. So I extolled the vital contribution, vital for the survival of our country, which is that of our activists, our wives and our daughters. Never have I said, we never could have done what we could do without them; they must participate more and more in politics at the national level and especially at the municipal level.

Thus I have spoken several times of our craftsmen and showed that much of our future depends on them and that the administration is there to help them achieve, and not the opposite!

Thus, at every opportunity, I talk about our producers, our farmers who feed us with their work and allow the state to function.

So I talked about our youth who will make our future, who are our future. They are the ones our bet on Rwanda!

So I spoke with conviction in our university, our intellectuals to contribute with all their knowledge to show us how we can better design our policies, master the challenges ahead for that they bring all their help to those in need.

And I will continue to speak to all forces, even marginal, in our country, and I have not sufficiently highlighted: - our military and gendarmes example of good citizenship, discipline, safety, rather than repressive discipline;

our religious and our religion: example of humanism solicitude for the next, often the poorest among us; their important role in the production and education of our youth. prisoners, but yes also, example of a nation that knows how challenging correcting herself some mistakes and whose redemption should also contribute to our progress.

I will continue to talk about our forces, because it is important that we all felt concerned and craftsmen of our development, we felt that all united as a family, the Rwandan family. And this "Rwandan family" is in the town, the basic unit of our development, it will be the strongest. This is the town that will be the real core of progress, "the glue" that will enable Rwanda to stay strong.

Valuing the lifeblood of a nation, it also means valuing our culture, our heritage, our cultural heritage and ecological; enhance the forces, it is also exalt the decisive role of the information. I spoke so often.

Without exalt our culture, without the mobilizing role of information, self-development there will be none.

Militants,

That's what I had to say today what I wanted to say, halfway of this Parliament. As I said with my usual frankness. I wanted indeed to objectively examine critically the situation with the data orientations relative to our expectations.

The fact finding is, in my opinion, positive. Some shifts, some decisions were necessary. I told them that I believe to be the most urgent. It made me especially helped reassure you, Militants, on the progress of our political and give you proof that every day we are trying to make a small step forward ... so that we move forward.

VIVE LE RWANDA LIVE THE COOPERATION BETWEEN PEOPLES.

