Rwandans, Dear friends of Rwanda,

For each of us, 1986 will have brought a lot of satisfaction, its share of disappointments too, his share of happiness, his share of distress. I hope and wish with all my heart - that the time of gladness and joy to have outweighed the moments of sadness, and that 1986 remains in your memory as a year that you will be allowed to make a not even a small step toward real progress, for yourselves, for your families, for your friends, for our country, RWANDA.

EVERY DAY ONE SMALL STEP TOWARDS PROGRESS -GUTERA Imbere MU Majyambere - several times already in my speeches this year .I used this theme that characterizes and that must characterize the way to the progress of the Rwandan people: EVERY DAY ONE SMALL STEP TOWARDS PROGRESS.

What small step towards progress we have made this year? How far have we traveled and in 1986 on the way to our self-development?

Militants, 1986 appears to me first as the year of some consolidation.

So if I take the example in the area of ​​our infrastructure, we approached seriously the optimal threshold that we set about extending our road and airport infrastructure: early in the year was completed our new KANOMBE terminal, which meets international requirements and our new needs in the field; our paved road network has experienced significant enrichment finishing the road CYANGUGU- GIKONGORO - Butare; construction and paving of another vital section, namely, the one from KAYONZA to GABIRO to KAGITUMBA, were started this year, while the road Kibuye - Gitarama, including paving will follow the current route, and Gitarama road - Gatumba - MUKAMIRA experiencing happy developments in the negotiations for their technical realization.

So we can see, now, ie when one of our main objectives in this area will be carried out: all the capitals of our prefectures will, shortly, connected between them and our capital, by a system solidly built and asphalted roads, which can only stimulate powerfully, increasing our trade in favor of ever closer integration of our country, and therefore, the best always cemented our society cohesion.

Indeed, for 12 years, we have every year a small step towards the realization of this major objective; today we are about to win this ambitious challenge! And I want, today, to present, on behalf of all Rwandans, moved our thanks to all our friends, donors, without the generous and ongoing support which the RWANDA could never consider carrying all these facilities, most beautiful one than the other!

It will now. Militants, as I said before our staff, there is little time, it will ensure, by all means, that our economy is able to support, on its own , she helped build!

It will also ensure, with maximum attention, that infrastructure will become a threat to our environment! Cross the natural forest, through the infrastructure of the modern type, a bet that must be won. But the expected immediate economic benefits should not cause environmental damage or long-term. These extraordinary ecosystems that are our natural forests, which are our natural parks, must continually be strengthened, despite, or precisely because of, the modern road that now crosses the forest NYUNGWE, or one that will run along shortly park of AKAGERA because these ecosystems are critical to our resource base, its permanent regeneration, so essential to our survival.

The year 1986 has also contributed to some consolidation in the area of ​​our agricultural production. Crops were very good, most of our products; improved marketing system designed to help small producers, cooperatives, the flow of production, begins to be functional; the few successes already achieved by the OPROVIA are proof that we are on the right track.

In addition, an early consolidation is also noticeable in terms of our agricultural policies, in particular the prices for some of our food products. Our agricultural price policy tends to put everything in the hands of our producers. We believe that understanding consumer interests are best served if we do everything so that our producers are encouraged to produce, they find markets for their products, and not to promote short-term consumption over production in the medium and long term!

The Government will firm on pricing policy, is to promote, by all means, a real transfer of resources to the campaign. We always said: if there is no massive increase in rural purchasing power, an accumulation of real wealth, our country, RWANDA will have no chance to get into a car solid growth.

Such a real transfer of resources to the campaign, Militants, can only be progressive; however it must be systematic; that we started implementing this year very favorably bias of which direction we want to go.

Importantly, it is decisive for the success of our policies in this area, our farmers, our producers know exactly where we want to lead us, for they know the reasons for government action, for that they can assert their views, through the cells of our Movement through the usual administrative channels, ORINFOR (regional information centers). We need everyone to know where we want to send us for all those who have something to say - can inspire us, can help us to develop ever better policies.

I now call on all our farmers, to our farmers, to our farmers, not to be discouraged, despite some disappointments recorded for certain products whose price floors could not be met. It is inevitable that, especially early, generous effort will undergo some minor mishaps. It is important to us to know where we want to improve and to progressively what to improve, even what officials revise, if necessary, some of the fixed prices, it appears that they have been a very realistic way, even that proposed prices take into account regional and seasonal characteristics of our products; in other words, to do everything that must accompany our price policy is rapidly put in place. Indeed, prices can only be an instrument of arbitration, a regulatory instrument, but they may be, must also be our industrialization efforts in the service of agriculture and our substitution efforts quickly follow, so that the purchasing power is steadily increasing and that the creation of our wealth is as real as organic, self-reliance as possible.

Much remains to be done. I ask all our producers to persevere, because progress is down the road; progress is the result of small steps that are done every day.

On another level, Militants, I wanted and I was convinced! - that 1986 is also a year of consolidation: I mean sanitation, so often applied to our economy. Sanitation, through the implementation of the most urgent reforms (the Investment Code, the tariff system, settlement of debt conditions, public procurement, and so on). Sanitation also by clarifying our policies in certain strategic areas such (international cooperation, legislation on water, the Municipal Development Fund, etc.).

Indeed, how could we consider the revival of our economic activities, how can we design a restructuring of our economy around something more self-centered, if we fail to implement these basic reforms, more urgent than the other? It is undeniable that we have been extremely prejudicial delay, because every day lost is a day actually lost! Every day born in RWANDA about 950 children; with each day lost, we take away their important opportunity to enjoy the economic outlook; with each day lost, we impose additional burdens; with each day lost, the future of our youth seems less assured.

To make up for delay incurred, we will. Militants "into overdrive"; a strict timetable for the finalization of these reforms will be established.

I take this solemn occasion. Militants, to reaffirm the self-development that we seek depends, economically, in large part, perhaps decisively, the way we manage our economic relations with the outside, c that is to say, the way we submit to the logic of our needs and our national interests! An important step towards the consolidation of our policy in this vital area has been taken this year.

Indeed, the Government has implemented this year the conditions for flexible management, but effective imports. If imports continued to "explode" and that we find alarming situations in certain areas (salt, sugar, and especially rice and wheat), we now know that this is not the management policy of our imports is concerned, but those who are responsible for implementing the guidelines established.

This year, Militants, we started allowing us to make a similar effort in terms of export promotion. I want to make clear today that this vast and ambitious program for the promotion of exports is not only the "for" and what we do to control our imports. It will also be one of our major priorities for the coming years, through precisely the urgent need for our country to control its foreign trade prior, as I have said, any 'self-reliance; well created.

The coming year we will bring together the conditions for this long-term effort: increased understanding, so a more encouraging attitude on the matter on the part of the administration to begin; export promotion will also require changing some laws, easing some regulations, the acquisition of a "mentality of exporting," the study of marketing channels, mastering negotiation techniques, exploration markets, packaging of our products that can be exported a day.

If in 1986 we were able to lay the foundations of the launch of these two very important programs - the management of imports and promote exports - 1986 has helped to consolidate certain of our assets.

Militants,

Year of consolidation, of course, in some areas, 1986 will also, for me, a year of reflection on the prospects of our country, an encouraging year for all our active forces involved in the prospective reflection on the challenges and the problems of our country, and the solutions to them.

We have started thinking aloud on the essential role of craftsmen in the construction of our country, in the construction of our economy. If the regulation of imports, increased purchasing power, job creation must be meaningful, it is that national production capacities should follow imperiously. And who better than our craftsmen are able to organize production so that it meets the effective demand, which better than small and medium enterprises are able to mobilize the human and other resources to create something that is their scope, that is manageable for the greater interest of RWANDA!

We also proposed a first prospective reflection on the challenges and promises of our Banques Populaires, spearhead in our self-reliance.

The problem of our youth was the subject of special attention; we put all the strength of our convictions to chart future promises that are hers.

Have we not called to all our intellectuals wherever they are, so they put all their knowledge, all their abilities forward thinking in the service of our country?

Have we not exalted the role of our forces, the essential function of our means of information that they are at the service of the national dialogue, to become, ever more, the spokesman all those who have something to say about the problems and the future of our country?

Hopefully, Militants, that 1986 has made everyone aware of us the importance of thinking and acting, based on an ever more acute perception of the challenges ahead, so that everyone feels involved and for everyone to contribute to this reflection within its means, according to their responsibilities, according to the expectations placed on him. These are thoughts that are never completed, he must return constantly need to deepen every day.

Is it not of the utmost importance that our African countries offer a consistent approach to our development, an approach that takes root in our culture, that we ayions something to offer ourselves, that comes from us, and that allows us to defend ourselves against those who, certainly well-intentioned, trying to push us in ways that we find that they do not reflect our aspirations? The year 1986 will have helped to convince us even more.

Militants,

1986 - year of some consolidation, the launch year of forward thinking - year, finally, early recovery ethical public administration.

It seemed to me that beyond regular contact should be maintained with the agents of the central government, it was important to counter the obvious degradation in professional ethics prevailing in our public administration, we do, in common, a deep pedagogical effort. Indeed, the decline in morality had found me there seems something to do with the lack of understanding of government policies, with the non-collection of coherence that characterizes them. This lack of understanding may explain, to some extent, but not excuse the officers, at least some, not knowing what they seemed to serve, seemed not to know the tasks they are called to spend in fact, not knowing the merits of their official status!

The Government and me personally, we committed to provide this year a first and major educational effort. This effort culminated in my first meeting with the agents of the civil service there three weeks. I would like to say that this visit impressed me deeply. I have retained the fierce determination of our employees want to work for the good of our country, their determination to denounce the abuses found, dedication and spirit of sacrifice, their lucidity also because it is clear that despite all the good will of the Government is absolutely inconceivable to satisfy both all expressed wishes.

And deficiencies of those who by their unspeakable behavior detrimental to the country, undermine the credibility of RWANDA, not have appeared more cruelly. It was also useful, even indispensable me clarify one way unequivocally the ins and outs of morality to govern the operations of our administration.

Once those ethical references have been understood at the time, sure that everyone is on the same wavelength, I can implement the conclusions we have drawn together.

And that's why. Militants, I have to rely on all of you; I need to know that all of you know that every day, it can, at what he does, or work for the cause of development of our country, or so ... weaken; there is no other term for this alternative! In every gesture he poses in his work, everyone opts for or against the development of his country!

The day when we are all convinced of this truth, that day, we will have come a big step towards the progress of RWANDA. I hope - and this is the whole meaning of ethics firming initiated in 1986 - I fervently hope that the coming year will allow us to take this step.

Militants, Friends of RWANDA, that's what I had to tell you about the year that is ending today.

The year 1987 begins.

Let me wish all my fellow to all my fellow citizens, all and all RWANDA RWANDAN anywhere at all Militantes and all Activists, my most cordial wishes, sincere for this new year is, too, a year of peace, a year of progress for each of you, so that we can continue to make every day a step towards an ever better life for you and your children.

I also want to present, on behalf of all the Activists and all the militants of our movement, my warmest wishes and most outspoken of peace, happiness, prosperity and solidarity of all members of the Diplomatic and Consular Corps at all responsible agencies and cooperation agencies, their families, their staff and their fellow citizens, the respected leaders of their countries, all our aid workers and their families, to all our volunteers, our religious and our religious, to all our friends working in Rwanda (and Rwanda), telling them that we know very well how their presence, their work, their encouragement are indispensable.

particularly warm greeting and moved, I wish to extend to the people and their distinguished Heads of State of the countries surrounding Rwanda, for the coming year is further evidence of the eagerness with which we pursue solidarity the agreement and regional stability in the interest of all the inhabitants of this part of the world.

Militants,

Before placing, as is customary under the motto that guides our inspiration, the next year, I would like to say a quick word on a subject that I have never failed to address my message end of year since 1984: namely our next plan.

The delay by its preparation is not tragic - I've already said - because it allowed us and will allow us, this delay doing things. A draft "Broad" has been adopted by the higher authorities of M.R.N.D .; they embody the culmination of a long process of finding a consensus on the future direction in many areas contributing to the achievement of the primary strategy is that of food self-sufficiency. The result of this long political consultation process is, in my view, very encouraging because, for the first time, all orientations were discussed by all the politicians, and for the first time, they all converge one transcendent goal.

It is therefore now proceed with greater speed, but with the same professional and moral seriousness, on two levels: that of the general mobilization and that of operationalization.

The mobilization of all our people around our next plan, if it must meet the requirements of a true self-development, is an essential step for us ayions one day plan that is worthwhile.

The National Revolutionary Movement for Development Manifesto says and I quote:

"Planning is the instrument for organizing action to achieve the goals of development M.R.N.D. The national economy has to be organized following periodic planes so that national resources are used rationally to meet the ever growing needs of the masses, and so that no sector of the economy is neglected. Planning must take a democratic and become the business of the whole nation. " End quote.

How can we ensure that the entire population is mobilized around this objective of survival if she could participate! It is therefore important that the debate on our national strategy, that of food self-sufficiency, become a national debate or the matter of the whole nation. Our farmers, our producers, our young people are not only there to execute directives from above, but it is important to actively participate fully in the definition of what must be done.

This reflection has to do with the essence of a society that identifies which will guarantee its future, rooted in its cultural essence, this reflection can be conducted with the deeper forces of our country i mean, our farmers, i mean our young people of our communities; it must be the business of the whole nation.

So I hope that as soon as possible, the Ministry directly concerned (Ministry of Planning), by adding the resources as it deems appropriate, prepare a concise document, a document of a few pages, a preview of what the concept of "food self-sufficiency, taken in its widest sense" means concretely, to a real national development strategy in terms of options, in terms of possible operational implications, in terms of possible priorities in terms of possible approaches!

This survey - which also usefully supplement the "Broad" - so deal with the theme of food self-sufficiency, of what it should mean to all of us, of what it must mean for municipalities, for prefectures. This text - written in simple language in a friendly language, in language understandable to everyone, contain many good questions affirmations.

Indeed, if we do not ask questions to our farmers, how would we know what they have to say? How could they tell us about their concerns, their suggestions, their extraordinary experience, solutions they propose to some of their problems? It is therefore a real national debate is organized around the objectives of the next Plan; the document requested and will be an important debate, help launch an important debate, in our towns, in our hills, in the cells of our Movement during the animation sessions in academic and intellectual circles that is to say, in all instances on which our efforts should be supported. This way will be able to install a real dialogue on the objectives, the means, the priorities, what everyone has to do, the very meaning of our planning efforts.

The other axis along which it is now appropriate to proceed very quickly is that the operationalization is that of translation into operational concepts into concrete programming concepts, objectives and policies that have been decided. It is therefore necessary as soon as possible, the technicians we offer a consistent pattern, a consistent approach so that we can move from reflection at the stage of planning, the actual programming. I think this operational approach can be worked out definitively in three months, so that, with the announced mobilization process, the effort in these two areas could lead to the end of 1987 a first draft of what will be our next Plan. Next Plan and respond more to the demands of what I have called "the new paradigm to inspire our planning"; we will, at that time, an important step toward what I applied, there are exactly two years when I was you said, "It is obvious that to be realistic and close to the realities of the country and its inhabitants, wide consultation will be necessary. We need every town feel concerned with the preparation of the Plan, as concerned with its later execution. "

Militants,

You will therefore not be surprised that we decided to put the year 1987 under the acronym of food self-sufficiency!

1987 will be "the year of food self-sufficiency."

The theme of this year hinge actually responds to two objectives. As 1987 is the decisive year in preparing our next plan and that it is precisely oriented along the well designed strategically food self-sufficiency, the theme was in fact given everything. It will - I hope - to further mobilize our joint efforts towards this major goal, because we dedicate to him and, in a concerted and directed all our intellectual and moral resources.

The "general mobilization" of which I applied the emergency, just now, in the context of the follow-up to the preparation of the next Plan, and take all its meaning because the theme of the year is it -even the emanation of political will which means that everyone will, at the end, ie, be intimately convinced that he is involved, he is part of the preparation and execution of future our next plan!

But the choice of theme for 1987 has an even deeper meaning. Indeed, the theme of food self-sufficiency is, in a sense, the culmination of all the efforts made so far and the justification of all prior annual themes!

Obviously, Militants, each annual theme mobilization opened or cover a specific field of activity, a critical area or highlighted a decisive factor - while contributing indirectly or directly at our self-sufficiency food.

Need I remind you that erosion control is the essence of the conservation of our soil. Do I remember that manure is their preferred food; as livestock - small, medium and large - provides both an essential nutritional intake and an important enrichment for organic manure (excluding other benefits); we also highlighted food crops and agricultural intensification as such, while the tree - nourishing source of all our agriculture - and the water is the life of everything and anything naft drives - have not only been the major themes of annual mobilization, but the tree is dedicated each year a special day, and the water is the same issue of the entire decade.

As you can see, Militants, we had to proceed patiently, step by step, all those years, that we gathered the most important factors involved in achieving the goal of food self-sufficiency.

The year 1987 and will be the year of consolidation of what we have done every year in the various areas for food self-sufficiency understood. So it is this year continuing to do what needs to be done in these areas; - erosion control, fertilization, crop production and livestock ... etc. - in the belief that all these efforts together for so long will finally bear fruit deserved.

But it is not only to continue and lead to a conclusion that we have undertaken; the theme of 1987 is also a powerful incentive for innovation, encouraging experimentation, research, better protection of the interests of our producers!

Food self-sufficiency will pose new challenges every day; every day it will innovate and experiment - the best method of erosion control. - the breeding farm, for some, agricultural production new techniques to others; daily agricultural research must find effective answers to the challenges ahead - and to play this critical role, this fundamental role in the advancement of our agriculture towards food self-sufficiency, it must be able to appeal to all human resources - teachers at the university agronomists in the prefectures and projects, researchers in various institutions, state officials in their daily work. Every day, it will strengthen the defense of our farmers and producers to find new formulas, new actions, new types of organization for the farmer-breeder is assured that the effort to feed the country is paid in return .

With this call implied innovation, imagination, contained within the overall theme of this year, we can start by gathering the stones that will make our food self-sufficiency based on solid foundations to the test challenges that we wait.

This is the deeper meaning that we give to the subject of food self-sufficiency retained for the coming year.

Militants,

Finally, 1987 will bring us great joy as we celebrate this year the 25th Anniversary of Independence of the Republic of Rwanda!

25 years of independence of Rwanda - 25 years since our country exists as a national entity recognized as such by the world. 25 years - Militants - yes it is a symbol, but also a promise! The symbol of a certain success because we have proved to the world that we are a worthy member of the society of nations; we have met the challenge, we have seized the real issue facing our country in the world today, namely by ensuring that with our own efforts and those of the international cooperation we can start by resolve in our key issues - the satisfaction of our basic needs, material and spiritual - we will contribute to the best possible way to solving the major problems of the world today.

A promise also because if the next 25 years must be like the first 25 years of our Independence, we can be assured that the gains already made will not only generate other more promising for Rwanda!

And for this, we must continue to take a small step, every day, to progress.

Rwandans, Militants, Friends of Rwanda,

I wish you a Happy 1987.

