Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development

Today marks the 25th anniversary of regaining our independence and our freedom.

It is with deep emotion that we welcome friends still our country from all over to celebrate with us the 25th anniversary of the recognition of RWANDA as a full member of Nations up our world.

On behalf of all Rwandans, and on my own behalf, I have the great honor and the intense joy to extend a warm welcome to all our guests, all our friends who wanted to show their solidarity with the RWANDA, on this solemn day of 1 July 1987.

We welcome as well, with great joy, and a lot of sympathy, the presence among us of Their Majesties Baudouin 1, King of the Belgians and Queen Fabiola; they had the great kindness to accept the invitation that the Rwandan people addressed their testimony in deep and lasting links between the Belgian people and the people of Rwanda. Their presence here honors us and is the eloquent sign of the excellent relations forever without shade, between the Kingdom of Belgium and the Republic of Rwanda.

We also have the special privilege to welcome the presence of our brothers and friends,

Comrade Denis Sassou-Nguesso, President of the Central Committee of the Congolese Labor Party, President of the People's Republic of Congo and current Chairman of the OAU. HE Kenneth David Kaunda: President of UNIP and President of the Republic of ZAMBIA. The Citizen Mobutu SESE SEKO KUKU NGBENDU WA ZABANGA, Popular Movement of the President-Founder of the Revolution, President of the Republic of Zaire - and Marshal of Zaire. Ndugu Ali Hassan Mwinyi - President of the Republic of Tanzania. His Excellency YOWERI-KAGUTA Museveni, President of the Republic of UGANDA and his wife.

Their presence is the living testimony of the picture of understanding, peace and harmony that our part of the world can offer, the values ​​on which we will build the development and progress of our peoples and our nations in the brotherhood and solidarity.

We are happy to have with us

Miss Maureen Reagan - Personal Representative of the President of the United States of AMERICA.

We have among us

Comrade YAZKOULIEV BALLY YAKOULIEVITCH, Vice President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet - Representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

We also welcome very warmly the presence of dignitaries from countries with which we bind relationships so successful and so intense cooperation.

We welcome all representatives of International Organizations, Regional and Sub-regional.

We particularly welcome the presence of Mr. Ide Oumarou, Secretary General of the Organization of African Unity.

To all our friends, comrades in the first hours of our independence, I would like to send a special salvation, full of emotion and loaded with so many memories.

We are very delighted to have with us the distinguished representatives and delegates of Cooperation Organizations Governmental and non-governmental representatives of the Press, which we are honored by their presence.

Finally, a special hello, we turn to all those and all those who, individually, have held so many, to show us their friendship and solidarity, in this day of celebration.

To all our guests from so many and often so far, we express our sincere thanks and more moved: their presence here today, Militants, in joy and rejoicing of our festivities devoted to the 25th anniversary of our political independence, is the liveliest and most striking evidence of the quality and exemplary relations of friendship and character of regional and international cooperation that the Republic of Rwanda has managed to build for 25 years, with countries and organizations represented today here by our illustrious guests.

FRIENDS OF RWANDA,

We will never forget being with us on this day of honor and joy, your presence any of dignity, warmth and affection. It is actually, your presence for us RWANDAN the guarantor of a future everything for peace and brotherhood, our true ancestral values, and that will also be the basis of a peaceful understanding and a happy stimulation between our peoples.

You will understand, Militants, my personal feeling, my pride as I, who on 1 July 1962, a young lieutenant, was flagship - the new national flag given me a few minutes ago by the President Kayi-BANDA - Parade our army - the National Guard then - who opened the festivities on Independence Square and me today, July 1, 1987, through the designs of God and your will, thanks to the trust and in support of the Rwandan people, have the incomparable honor of receiving - as head of the country, and on your behalf, so many eminent personalities, come show us their friendship; which actually measures the degree of confidence and sympathy acquired by the Republic of Rwanda across the world.

Majesties, Heads of State and Government, Mrs, Heads of Delegation, Members of the Diplomatic and Consular Corps, Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, Militants, supporters, sympathizers of the National Revolutionary Movement Development,

It was 25 years ago, our country, RWANDA, regained its independence and freedom.

For 25 years, Rwanda existed as a sovereign nation.

The solemn moment that is responsible for this anniversary as symbols for a nation as young as ours, it is the ideal opportunity to reflect on what the first 25 years can mean in the life of a nation that is trying to deserve a place among the others. This is also an incentive to address some challenges, some deadlines are those of our country; it is an invitation, finally, to look at the possible future of international cooperation relations, the cooperation that we have been a valuable contribution to our country has been able to achieve so much progress.

For about two-thirds of the inhabitants of our country today, access to freedom and independence has never been the issue for which their elders were ready to give their lives. Born after 1962, the majority of our people could enjoy what must be considered the essence of all: to be maftre of its destiny, assume, with all the dignity and the seriousness they require, responsibilities are those of a company earning its company name.

There are a quarter of a century, we began to take our responsibilities. For a quarter century, we try to take the best of our knowledge of the challenges, issues, deadlines are those in our society.

So that we can start with the responsibilities which are those of a free society, it was necessary, Militants, our seniors révoltassent against feudal power, minority. It took our seniors préparassent social revolution and popular 1959 allowing them to get rid of this anachronistic feudal power. We had to get rid of its colonial protector - Carefully and methodically, our elders knew refuse both double-feudal and colonial enslavement by first breaking the alliance of these two powers.

The popular revolution in 1959 was the basis for building a democratic society and that is the Republican RWANDA today; and thus preceded the victory against the colonial power, and his coronation was happy accession of our country to political independence on 1 July 1962.

This is how. Young Activists and Youth Activists, that on 1 July 1962, after a double victory, was proclaimed the political independence of the Republic of Rwanda; it has allowed our country to take place in the orchestra of free nations; it allowed us to become a member of the United Nations family. It also allowed RWANDA to be one of the founding members of the Organization of African Unity, and of belonging to the Non-Aligned Movement.

We can, we want to celebrate the 25th anniversary of our independence, but we remember all those and all those who were responsible for the recovery of our freedom.

It is now, more than ever, we measure the extraordinary scope of their action, the act of faith that they have asked for our future, the huge gamble they took. We owe them everything.

Let us homage vibrant joy, Militants, all those and all those without courage, without sacrifice, without the sacrifices which the RWANDA would not be what it is today, and still living among us, to the delight of our young people who will be able to soak up the authenticity of our culture, the original teachings of our immediate history and deepen the sense of mission than their elders, their parents, our old full wisdom, have entrusted to them.

Let us also an emotional tribute to all those and all those who have paid with their lives the fight they have conducted so that our people could access the independence and freedom.

Can I request the honorable audience to keep a minute of silence in their honor? Thank you.

It is for those who gave their all for our country that we must assume, with great dignity, and aware of the issues, our free nation responsibilities.

But our responsibilities to our people, to the world, does it means? What is the real challenge that our people raised fighting for its independence, it was 25 years ago?

This challenge, Militants, the 1st Republic and more the Second Republic have always fought with courage. The challenge is to ensure that our country, RWANDA, with his own efforts and the support of international cooperation well understood, is able, every day a little more, to meet our basic needs both material and spiritual, to promote social justice for all, and that is truly the foundation of any property including national development.

To affirm this is to affirm something mundane ... and revolutionary at the same time.

Banal - for can we conceive the goal of progress understood any company other than the increasing satisfaction of material and psychological needs of all its members, thanks to own efforts to guarantee the permanence of acquired, in a perspective of justice authentic social?

Revolutionary - for who could claim to have been very successful in this task; What country could demonstrate that the needs, material and spiritual, constantly changing, would be fully satisfied for all of its inhabitants?

Wanting to meet these basic needs, it is actually a very complex task - their very definition, interaction, let alone the identification of best policies, depending on the dynamics of each company at every point in its evolution, pose problems, theoretical and practical, very delicate.

Want social justice for all, this is not the case of a decree, it is rather the result of many strategies to constantly reinvent, wisely set priorities, attitudes in line with expectations.

The task before the leaders of our countries on the eve of Independence could seem so huge, and it was. Everything was to be done. The task was enormous and fragile forces. Armed assaults from all sides threatened constantly Young Republic.

But we were able to meet the challenge and with time, the cohesion of the people and the courage of the young soldiers of independent Rwanda. But Rwanda, like many African societies, once incorporated nations, countries, and had to face the past that had stirred many passions; wounds that had caused the fight for democracy, independence, national sovereignty threatened, were slow to heal; own convulsions to every nation, at least in its early days, and would continue to challenge the real gains made during the same period. Who can forget the many seizures experienced in the First Republic?

Who does not remember their conclusion that the disintegration at the beginning of 1973, political institutions, insecurity in the country, peace and national unity seriously compromised by unnecessary wars and the economy engaged on a dead end slope?

It is to restore peace and national and moral revolution agreement of July 5, 1973 took place. Since that time, our country is experiencing a period of peace and national stability is for many in the social and economic progress achieved since. Peace and unity were prior to that we were able to devote the bulk of our efforts at this so-called development.

The Second Republic was thus born under the sign of peace, unity and development. It helped, we can affirm, to end the longing for revenge; it will possible to heal the wounds, moral and others of the past.

Most evidence Militants, we see it in the fact that most of our young people today do not seem to even understand that there might one day be a division between our main ethnic groups, knowing that in time there both had some powerful Hutu some poor Tutsi.

Our young people today know that our struggle was against a hegemonic feudal system and beyond, but not against an ethnic group as such. Our young people seem to have understood this perfectly: That's why we have great confidence in our future, the promises will be more reassuring everyone will put his own and divisions, so damaging in the past have been abandoned once for all. We are all RWANDA: Rwandan in each satisfies, wherever he is and whatever his social conditions today.

Another factor that made our task difficult was the so called "development model" that we proposed.

What was then called the very short development - mad he aroused hopes, the way it was designed, the distressing conceptual reduction we made it - all this proved to be a decoy.

He had to start first by learning to be wary of all these lessons that we were offered so generously to all those good principles which were enacted for our instruction, standards of behavior that they were trying to teach us in the hope the "development" did not fail to manifest quickly.

We were all wrong; those who thought to possess the whole truth and nothing but the truth - and unfortunately there are always those who think the - and we who believe it! We believe that the benefits of a mimicry, we believe that it is sufficient to mimic to catch those who had advance.

What an illusion - we know it today! It was actually start to learn everything and it was not easy, since so many obstacles, so many vested interests, the whole context of our peripheral location opposed it, as it often opposed the system training received for the mostly outside - in the West as in the East - and that would have required an effort for which many of us were unprepared, namely, that which was to review all truths learned abroad in light of our national reality.

Even the term "development" is misleading. Here in RWANDA, the term development can be compared to what we call "to step forward"; this is our way of seeing the progress; it's how we think and see life, to step forward, every day; and by that we mean that it is an ongoing process that is never finished, and consists of a thousand small gestures that make a step forward every day. 'Development' for us therefore is not a condition that we should reach an end point that we should aim for.

Those who offered us their mode of development, how they think, could not only be right, we see better today than yesterday, because they are not usually the first to burn what they seemed to have loved and those who were so certain laws and market forces, the free play of competition, seemed to believe that the time when these principles to them were favorable to them. What was considered "development" has not that certainty;

as it is true that new contradictions have emerged, making the first certainties waver; as it is true that the unrestrained accumulation, which is said to be become the same purpose so-called advanced societies would only plunder the resource base of our planet, but that we believe should be the heritage of all mankind; As it is also true that the international exchange, inevitably uneven, between the industrial goods with high added value, and our unprocessed raw materials, besides the accumulation spiral driven by technological and scientific knowledge that we are totally inaccessible only increases the difference between the average level of industrialized countries, and ours.

This growing gap is not limited point unfortunately the material aspects; it also creates a psychological distance that we appear increasingly worrying; it may, indeed, lead to a conceptual break with the understanding of our realities, often a complete misunderstanding of the meaning of the state of extreme poverty which is that of the majority of people in our country, or the purpose of the evolution of our societies.

These two factors - the difficult but necessary socio-political national consolidation and the illusory nature of most of the "remedies" offered for our development - making the task of then very delicate officials, must be added a third, namely the cruel lack of experience, the cruel lack of trained cadres, capable of designing innovative solutions to our problems and that meet our expectations, lack of means also that forbade us to undertake right away that we would could consider useful for our development.

Despite these three factors they are wrong now measure could be as handicaps, RWANDA, Militants, had, and still has, a great asset!

This extraordinary asset is our peasant is our peasants! It is their total daily hard work is their exceptional sense of sacrifice, who have they worked hard every day to feed, despite often extremely difficult conditions, a population knowing the a population growth rate the highest in the world. It is their amazing adaptability, pragmatism, their congenital distrust of any "miracle solutions" offered to them so regularly. It is also their genius, their intimate knowledge of our ecosystems, which allowed them to draw their plots of land resources actually amazing. This is their openness, their sense of innovation that allows them to quickly assimilate what they view them as representing them for real progress.

Majesties, Heads of State and Government, Ladies and Gentlemen,

If then in the first 25 years of our Independence, RWANDA has still managed to win many successes in its fight for progress, if he was able to accomplish important steps forward, it is first to our farmers and peasants that we must.

Militants, say thank you to them, today, on this symbolic day, let them thank you with all our heart. We owe much of our gains. Today we pay solemnly honor our farmers and our farmers, our craftsmen too.

Young Rwanda,

On this solemn day, I would tell you, you repeat, that the admirable lesson of our peasants, it is to you that she actually address. It is you our human resources of tomorrow; you are yourselves peasants, craftsmen yourselves, whether you are officials or employees yourselves, it is you who will shape our future; never forget the lesson of our peasants. It is for you to take over, because the only real handicap potential of our progress, it is not so much the isolation of our country, it is not so much the absence of dramatic resources is not not so much the depletion of our land, it is not so much the vertiginous increase of our population. No, the real handicap could be located and in terms of human resources, if they were not up to their tasks, if they were not up to the expectations placed in them by the vast majority of our country, namely, our peasants. It is this lesson that he will withdraw from our recent past.

Majesties, Distinguished guests, Militants,

The consistency that we wanted to give our efforts to progress understanding of our country, we have summarized by the term "self-development".

The self-development, for us, this is not a slogan, it is not an effort to theorize, it is not a vain aspiration to want to marry this or that doctrine or school of thought. No, self-development, for us is the belief that progress must be based primarily on our own strength, we can not live beyond our means and that the solutions to our problems must be home.

The self-development is also a way of affirming the dignity, respect for others, allowing dialogue. This is, of course, also an openness that, beyond the struggles of clans dogmatic, curious to watch all, does not a priori, and judge, according to the logic of national interests well-designed, validity solutions, approaches, proposed priorities; beyond the obvious pragmatic side, self-reliance is the rejection of any idea of ​​autarky, intellectual, cultural or material.

The self-development, it is also, for us, the affirmation of our faith in the future - while being a constant reminder of our condition, the fundamental challenges we face and that seem so overwhelming.

These challenges, distinguished guests, Militants, shall have for a very long time, something to do with the maintenance, and, a fortiori, strengthening our core national balances, and are:

the balance between the population and our ability to feed; socio-ecological balance, that is to say, the balance entered improving our standard of living, valuing our own resources for this purpose, and safeguarding our environmental heritage; cultural equilibrium, that is to say, the balance between deepening our cultural identity and the requirements of the so-called modernization: the cultural balance, the desire to be ourselves, but also to be present at the appointment of giving and receiving.

Our goals for 25 years have not> changed; only the circumstances for their realization have worsened:

ensure that our economy will enable us to always have enough to eat, in quantity and quality, while our population is growing at a dizzying pace and that our lands are becoming scarce;

ensure that our resources are able to cover most of our basic needs, as these needs are only increasing and that our resources are limited;

ensure that our cultural heritage to guide us in our development orientations is enriched thanks to new tools, technological and scientific space again, thanks to the breath of solidarity that we come from outside, as the world looks away from us, leaving us in its wake, the vision of a world "is more and more selfishness and the first for himself."

We have always considered that self-development, as we see it, the realization of our basic objectives that take the mentioned balances, had something to do with how we actually manage what we called "the five poles our action ", our five key areas for improvement.

The first five Militantes areas of progress and activists, has always been the promotion of justice and rule of law, because we are all convinced that development is primarily a matter of social justice; without social justice, no development, no progress!

Today, Rwanda is a state of law that respects the freedoms and fundamental rights of its citizens and does everything to ensure the free expression of opinions and ensure public safety.

Our country, Militants, be proud, yes, proud of what he accomplished in the field of human rights! Respect for the rights and freedoms of everyone, this is our credo every day.

Of course no better than ourselves knows the deficiencies that are still to be rectified, no further suffers from what we should improve.

During my recent meetings with officials, I had the opportunity to speak at length on this subject. The measures we have taken and the conclusions we have drawn, reassure us on the progress we continue to make in the field of justice, today, tomorrow, after tomorrow, every day.

With each additional progress made in the field of justice and strengthening of our state of law, we will help build an even stronger future for our children.

That, Militants, our unwavering commitment to the future.

Illustrious guests, Militants,

A second axis along which we design our progress is the field of our economic development policy.

If the lived reality of the rule of law, a functioning justice is, we think, a prerequisite for the effective mobilization of everyone, an economic policy for self-understood conditions in turn the material and spiritual progress of our population.

We all know the significant progress we have made, economically; uninterrupted period of peace and national agreement, we have known for so long, we have, in fact, allowed to cross a few important steps.

It would be indecent, I think, want to insist now on the path we have traveled with our friends and were always witnesses. So many challenges, however, are in front of us today that the path may well be modest before the deadlines that we are still waiting.

It has always been our belief that one of the prerogatives of the so-called "independence" was, and is, basically, for our young nation, this flexibility that allows us to make our decisions independently thereby accepting that we could be wrong.

This flexibility even young nations, which authorizes to take particular measures without resorting to international bodies for their asking permission; one that allows them to determine their economic policy, without what they wanted them to be imposed from the exterior this flexibility, inseparable from the idea of ​​dignity such as postulated the concept of self-development, c is the seriousness with which we manage our macroeconomic balances that we provide!

The experience of recent years, the impact of the current crisis of raw materials, have reminded our country, more clear we can not, they were about to lose, imperceptibly perhaps, but hopelessly, control their balances.

For our country, it was necessary to react with the necessary vigor. And that's what we did, through the economic emergency plan that I presented it a few weeks ago.

In economic policy, the lesson is threefold:

absolute control of our debt; total control of our budget planning; control as complete as possible of our external economic relations.

We have all the measures in place, but we're not so far out of danger.

On this day in our 25 years of independence, Militants, we want to ensure that our commitment and vigilance in economic policy will be seamless for our economy to be strong so that it can resist temptation and the bad shots that we bear the international economic system, so that our economy is able to support, on its own, it has helped to build, that is to say, we have.

Majesties, Heads of State and Government, Mrs, Heads of Delegation,

Regardless of the seriousness with which we try to manage our economy, a crisis like the one we know today, can upset a few weeks every effort as carefully as they could have been built; a crisis like the one we know can destroy the positive results of several years, can compromise up to the hope of one day having the encouraging prospects.

Where then is this social justice globally that we would one day consider a less damaging economic system, less unjust, less degrading?

This is because the international economic system appears to us so unfair, we are so hostile that it will take us more than before, not rely primarily on our own strength, that we will not live above our means, we will have to trust only solutions that come from us, we ourselves have developed.

The third area of ​​progress is closely linked to the control of population-supply equation, in other words, to food self-sufficiency.

Food self-sufficiency, we define it in a very broad sense. It goes beyond the aspect of production as such, because it is usually the result of many actions in many areas, especially in those who allow our farmers, our farmers to improve their standard of living.

Indeed, when the farmer realizes that production allows it to purchase goods that improve living standards, it will be encouraged to produce more. The concept of food self-sufficiency has something to do with the increase in rural purchasing power, with the creation of non-farm productive employment.

Food self-sufficiency is directly related to the endogenous industrialization, valuing national resources by processing, to support the demand for the products of the peasant, facilitating a policy of incentive price.

Food self-sufficiency is played at the commune level. It is based on our local politics. During my three meetings with officials, this year we have probably largely covered the topic of food self-sufficiency and its implications. So I do not dwell further on this subject.

But today I would like, because of the severity of this problem, emphasize our demographic policy.

We have set up a mobilization structure for birth control, acting through information, training, persuasion, direct assistance.

Today, the question arises whether the efforts made were sufficient or whether to revise our strategy in this area.

The field of control of population growth if ever control there may be, as this area is delicate and rebellious to any mechanical treatment, is for us Rwandans charged with much emotion.

As found and said our great philosopher Kagame, our reason for being, of our people, has always been our children. For us, this is the greatest value we ayions, the most important too; the most fundamental commitment is to our children than we spend.

Is it then conceivable that one day to another the foundation of our way of seeing the world, the meaning of our lives can change radically?

The population explosion has totally caught us off guard. Its violence, its scale was such that while she manifested, we were still wonder how it was ever possible that we watched as our greatest asset, the very meaning of our life, can turn against us and threaten our achievements so badly torn.

But today, we must tackle the problem in all its gravity, without shame and without prejudice.

This is today to see the situation as it is; that is our responsibility.

What we think, what we want is that it is in his conscience that each must find the key to his behavior towards this national problem.

What we continue to oppose what we do not want is to violate the consciences of our compatriots.

What we think is that everyone in front of his conscience, must find the solution that suits him and he can take responsibility.

But for it to act according to his conscience, he must know he can do and must do.

I appeal here to the Catholic Church, the Protestant churches of all religious communities in our country, for they reflect the name of the dignity of each of us, on behalf of the dignity of our country in their role as moral training officials of consciousness of the people so that they legitimize this supreme arbiter what the conscience of each, so that each couple can consider as the solution to it that his conscience dictate him at the number of children they want to have, facing the serious problem of rapid population growth over the same physical survival of our children.

Our will, our commitment will be steadfast in strengthening still further, by all means in our power, population-food balance by acting on all sectors that define it, and also exploring regional solutions, together with friendly countries of Rwanda and the active support of the international community willing to facilitate regional solutions for the benefit of all.

Your Majesties, Distinguished guests. Militants,

The fourth pillar of progress that will shape our future is what we call the social and ecological balance. We define it as the harmonious relationship that should exist between the improvement of living standards of our people, and safeguarding or strengthening the basis of our resources.

Our commitment to the future is to ensure by all means, it is to continue to ensure the generation that we will follow an increasingly rich ecological heritage, that his options remain as open as possible.

The fifth and final area of ​​progress as we have always designed, is mobilizing all our forces, all these forces are the real bearers of our progress, our future.

All commitments we repeated today, which will be those who will guide us in the future can not take their scale if the forces are theirs, all our policies, our commitments will have no impact if they are worn by the forces of our country.

I would not go back on all that we have said about it, the organization and the political administration, the important role of our armed forces, on the youth, intellectuals, artisans, our farmers . We talked at length about it.

However, the special occasion of this day makes me you submit two thoughts:

The first relates to the importance of administrative reform. The modernization of public administration is a priority for our country.

Our administrative reform, which we will tackle, is the root of our administration in the problems of our country, to make it as close as possible administered, for it to be as close as possible to the population and promotes by all means the participation of the latter in the work of national development.

Think administration from the base, from our socio-cultural environment, to make it as endogenous as possible, for it is one of the most vital forces of society - here at the bottom - the fundamental issue is that of public administration and policy at dawn the next 25 years we expect.

The second reflection is for this moral force and considerable spiritual represented the church, religious communities in our country.

We owe Militants, a very large part of our social progress; the work done by churches on the health, education, social organization and community development is invaluable.

On this day of joy and gratitude, we want to give them a vibrant tribute sincerity and warmth for what they did for our development for 25 years. And this momentum should strengthen and continue. It is my duty to invite and encourage all the forces of the country to speak about the problems that it faces, on possible solutions to these problems.

We need to hear more churches to speak on major issues and challenges of our country to join the debate on development, bring about a number of events the special lighting that can be theirs.

It is necessary that the members of these associations and religious congregations, beyond the spiritual contributions, show that they live well all national realities. Participate more in the moral education of our youth. It is necessary that these members live and practice UMUGANDA, our collective development efforts, the UMUGANDA expression of our will, the will of the Rwandan people to rely primarily on its own strength. The UMUGANDA our commitment to work together. For we fight together, we build all our roads, health centers, our churches. Have we forgotten that this is, by the force of their arms and hands, without crane, without machines, this is how our parents, our mothers and fathers have built all these cathedrals? The UMUGANDA, cement national unity, making all Rwandans brothers, "... only men are brothers who work together."

Militants Our commitment remains that of promoting our forces whatsoever, to the delight of our people.

That very briefly some of the challenges, some of the problems, some basic guidelines that should be addressed in this day of honor and symbol for our future, and we chose to illustrate with five areas of progress as we had identified as references.

The maturity of 25 years of independence also invites us to place the development of our country in the context of the time. Most appeared then to consolidate the nation, the unity of the country, the state as such.

It took that Rwanda says; it took that Rwanda make known his identity, he says as a state.

Militants,

If the first 25 years of our independence were devoted to the consolidation of the State - the next 25 years will be devoted to the consolidation of our common!

Strengthen our common by all means - that's the commitment that we renew today and that will guide us more and more, thanks to the new inspiration that will be ours.

If, within 25 years, we have made much progress in strengthening our common we did during the first 25 years of our independence, for the consolidation of our country, the Rwandan state, we can truly say that we have done everything to ensure us a reassuring future, we have done everything to leave our children a legacy worthy of them.

Majesties, Heads of State and Government, Distinguished Heads of Delegations, Ladies and Gentlemen,

The reflections that inspired me this anniversary, serious in its meaning, would not be complete if I did not finishing with a tribute to International Cooperation to which we owe so much of our progress, both in our development, so many hopes, and so many of our achievements.

On this day of the 25th Anniversary of our Independence, I wish, on behalf of the Rwandan people and on my own behalf to thank all our heart, all those and all those who, through international cooperation that they have given us have enabled us to have so much infrastructure, more beautiful than the other, so many Rwandans trained, so much success in so many areas.

I want to say to all those and all those who have made us the honor of accepting our invitation and who are present among us, to them, to all those who had to stay home and after the Rwanda through the projects they advocate for us in their respective organizations, to all those who, of their own pockets, help many non-governmental organizations that work with us, to all of you, I want to say that we have always done what we could do to make us worthy of your efforts to make us worthy of your trust.

We tried to manage our economy, our country, in the most conscientious way we were able.

It is also our commitment to the future.

Rwanda, it is true, can not do without international cooperation.

International cooperation was vital for our development - and it will be for much longer.

We must always make sure to carry out our strategies, our goals - we want them to be as coherent as integrated as possible, to avoid any waste of valuable resources - we have the best chance for their success.

That is the reason, basically, that pushes us to give to international cooperation essential importance we attach to it. As resources received, even sparingly, are all the more necessary before extraordinary emergencies that we expect and that we live in a world that increasingly gives the impression of "every man for himself." Rwanda must, more than ever, take great responsibility attitude to international cooperation.

Our international cooperation should be the result of intense consultation, transparent, consistent and concise with our partners, engaged in what should be a day considered a true solidarity contract.

For effective cooperation, we need mutual interests, we need common goals. In the historical situation of the moment, developing countries seem to be those who derive the most benefit from cooperation; this is perhaps inevitable, and we lose nothing to recognize it because the historical situation is what it is. However, some developing countries have scarce resources and coveted, with an interesting geopolitical situation rent, a large market that can absorb some of the overproduction in industrialized countries can more easily argue the reciprocity of interests justifying more easily to international cooperation donor countries called for public opinion.

For Rwanda, reciprocity of interests is more difficult to argue, as we do not have significant market or scarce resources, nor the slightest geopolitical bargaining power.

We did not have much to offer: if not the effort, the promise to solve with us a number of basic problems, so that we do not contribuions increase the problems already quite complicated in the world but to work, however, even modestly, in the advent of a world in which there will be fewer problems between nations.

The issue of cooperation RWANDA, as we would see it, is to ensure that through our own efforts, supported by those of the international and regional cooperation, we can solve with us what to solve not to jeopardize peace in the world, not to create new problems.

For that, even more than in the past, cooperation can meet the prospective issue and making them even more, cooperation, now is not it time to revisit some of its practices? To be even more this ferment of progress and that it can not even prepare for the failure of his mission, a certain revision of a number of aspects does she needed it?

Indeed, is it even conceivable today not to accept the principle of co-management, co-responsibility, the principle that we consider elementary and involves: shared responsibility, which implies constantly renewed consensus, ongoing dialogue, transparency commitments, recognizing the other as a full partner, able to reason, acceptance of the right to error, from either side, in the certainty that what is intended is the common and sincere search of solutions identified problems together?

Is it still justified that we should borrow for services and benefits that we neither sought nor endorsed? Or we can continue to support several hundred missions a year without the risk of paralyzing the functioning of the Government?

Or do we continue to accept that interest begins to run before we even started the loan in question? Or that we are required changes in corporate structures? Will we continue to accept the supervision of government expenditures, by such donor, or even coordination of government policies such funding agency are preconditions for signing of cooperation agreement?

We are one of the world's countries - we know only too - which are said to be less developed; Nevertheless we are very sensitive to these attacks on our dignity, and our national sovereignty.

We desire a thing is to maintain with all our donors relationships of respect, mutual and sincere friendship.

Majesties, Heads of State and Government, Ladies and Gentlemen Heads of International Cooperation in Rwanda, distinguished guests, Militants,

25 years of cooperation, RWANDA selected five "lessons-looking statements" that are, in his view, many challenges to cooperation in the coming years.

The first lesson is the importance of the duration of the undertaking, synonymous with success; it is rewarding for both partners, as expression of a contract of solidarity between two peoples, valuing basically the idea of ​​genuine cooperation to public opinion.

The second lesson is the need for bold solutions to reduce the danger of over-indebtedness institutionalized.

The third is the strategic asset. It is no longer possible ,: we believe, to proceed by action or specific projects; this is the integration of an action, the integration of a project, a program in a national policy context that such an action, such a project, such a program can acquire their meaning. That is also why all our planning system will be increasingly conceived in terms of operational strategies, integrated with each other based on well-identified national goals. Through strategic asset, international cooperation can only strengthen its scope and impact.

The fourth lesson is the common challenge. The cornmune will be the focus of our efforts in every way; this is the challenge we face the future of RWANDA. It will require a tremendous effort of imagination, a willingness to innovate on the part of international cooperation, to be rethought from the town, to be rehabilitated understood the requirements of strengthening municipal capacity.

The fifth finally education is ever more authentically Rwandan cooperation. This means a further internalization, the most immediate apprehension of Rwandan realities through cooperation. This implies firstly a thorough co-management, a new dialogue for a renewed consensus, and, secondly, increased decentralization, an organic flexibility, more vibrant specificity, a more functional intelligence delegation.

This is the seal of fraternity is the promise of solidarity lived intimately. This is the interpretation, with the eyes of the peasant, the artisan, the militant world of the interpretation, and issues of cooperation for the future.

Militants,

Speaking cooperation, we will never do not exalt, with all the joy and excitement that it provokes us, regional cooperation, that with our neighboring countries, countries of the region, with which our destinies are so closely related, the hopes which we join with all the fervor with which we work for peace and understanding for the development of this region, this region of ours.

On this solemn day, Militants, we will renew our deep commitment, sincere, convinced not to stop one day to devote all our forces, all our convictions to the development, progress in regional cooperation with all friendly countries for together we can show the world that we are able to solve our problems and to prepare a future radiant with peace and prosperity.

Majesties, Heads of State and Government, Ladies and Gentlemen, Militants,

The few reflections inspired me the 25th Anniversary of our Independence, the solemn renewal of our commitment to the future, I would conclude by the question of what is in reality the future, what can be the purpose of a country like RWANDA, in a world where the offsets, in many respects, are so excessive.

For us Rwandans, the question of the purpose of our company, our development efforts can not find a satisfactory answer by the challenging, complex, it is true, but inevitable jn the discourse on the rationality of paradigm development dominant fuel almost exclusively economist transfers conditions studies, that is to say, the flow of all kinds, which govern relations between countries, particularly between the very rich and the very poor.

A good development policy must safeguard the essence of our culture, the essence of our dignity, our reason for being.

Questioning postulated requires that economic rationality, as accepted in the dominant development model, to be put into perspective for all of the basic concepts that inspire.

And new conditions of transfer (transfer of knowledge, technology transfer, transfer of resources -) should find their justification, draw their validity, define their content only from the local reality reinterpreted, until the promotion of local knowledge that from the inclusion of local knowledge, basically that from a vision of self-development, where the "primacy of economics" - as the official paradigm willing - gives way to politics gives way to social, cultural and relationships between man and his environment - in other words, a vision where moral dimension premium over the rest.

It is only these two conditions, we believe - challenging the dominant paradigm and the consequent revision of the transfer conditions - we can find a reassuring answer to the question of the purpose of a company like ours .

This shows the enormous challenge that international cooperation will face tomorrow - because of it, this international cooperation will largely depend on the legitimacy of questioning the basic paradigm; it will also depend on the start of the review of transfer conditions.

But it also means huge challenge for developing countries.

In RWANDA, this challenge will be nothing less than a spiritual revolution. And we are already committed to it.

Our joint efforts will shape the future of our country; they will give him a purpose that will justify its purpose and who will become her a safe and happy.

This is our challenge for the next 25 years!

VIVE LE RWANDA! LIVE AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION!

Thank you.

