Militants, Friends of RWANDA,

A year full of symbols and promises. A year as major economic difficulties - such appears to us 1987!

A year as full of symbols and promises! The year 1987 has been that of the 25th anniversary of regaining our political independence.

Great was the dignity, deep joy with which the people of Rwanda celebrated this shiny symbol of its success as an independent country as a full member, and respected the Nations of the world.

25 years in the life of a nation, it is not much. But no - it not during this period that shape a country, a nation that is emerging, and justify hopes for the future of a people and a company must prove that it is able to face the first challenge, namely, to be truly in society, organize, organize, undertake, in the early days, the responsibilities for its members, for his children - in other words, meet expectations she placed by the regional Community, by the international community?

Militants,

All friends of RWANDA, from near or far in our country with us to commemorate this auspicious day, all were unanimous in recognizing the truly important way since 25 years by the people of Rwanda.

I want to thank you very warmly - to thank from my heart all Rwandans, all Rwandans and all Rwandan youth in particular - huge effort and enthusiasm that you have provided for this first major anniversary of our history policy could be celebrated worthily, so joyously, too, and with sincere and indelible gratitude to those and those who had contributed, sometimes even with their lives, that our beautiful country, RWANDA, could be born and thrive.

Find in our past reason to hope, define the issue today with a new look, designed a prospective imagining our future challenges, challenges of post - tomorrow and apply this effort prospecting and imagination to the vision that should guide us today so that we put in place now which should be in place to be ready tomorrow - that's deep questioning of the 25th anniversary of our political independence!

This is in preparation for this major event - the 25th anniversary of the birth of our country, a symbol of maturity - is to answer this fundamental questioning that, for almost two years, we have devoted consciously patiently, but without no compromise, our most lucid effort, most committed, to check first if that had been in place since a quarter century, is always appropriate to the needs and demands of today.

This was necessary, absolutely, a new awareness of the real issues, issues redefined because, compounded by the circumstances, the future development of our country; it was necessary to proceed systematically, without any complacency, a critical examination or self-criticism, self-development of the vision that guides us in our conception of understanding progress of our country, and the resulting priorities for the future, for this 25th anniversary of our independence becomes this crucial juncture in the life of RWANDA, which we will deepen our guidance, to reassure us on the directions taken, based on ever more acute and increasingly shared perception the forces of our country, the path we must follow to ensure our children a secure future, a future in encouraging open, they can be proud, and which will also be ours.

This examination of conscience - we have done also through our meetings with officials of the central government and political leaders of the various departments and agencies of our country.

The public administration and policy at home must be seen as a key - the key that can open the door to a promising future, but also the key that we could close the horizon, deprive us of the opportunity to glimpse a reassuring future, which would be the case if it was not motivated by making his vocation, by which justifies its existence - namely to serve the common good, without pause or rest!

The public administration and policy, it is really the key to open the floodgates of national social dynamics, the key to trigger all these initiatives, all this entrepreneurial spirit, who seek only to be realized ; also the key that allows to release the forces of imagination, to legitimize the social and economic innovations that can revolutionize the socio-political landscape

But for this it is key to our progress - public administration and policy must be at the height of the vital role it must assume for the survival of our country.

The Rwandan government was about to become a burden increasingly heavy; it began with show signs of breathlessness, exhaustion, distraction guilty.

It was high time to react - too much effort to losses of all kinds in the tasks compromised the effectiveness of the work expected, the execution of instructions, data monitoring guidance; while actually accomplished work became increasingly by a few officers, few, but always the same, especially motivated by exemplary dedication, the majority of our confused personal leisure pursuits and officials with the workload.

The decline of morals and the deterioration of governance, which resulted in, could not but affect negatively the reputation of RWANDA.

We reacted vigorously. We have, during this year, not only clarified the ins and outs of ethics in public management and traced the codes of conduct are, but we have also clarified and deepened through dialogue that is installed the essence of our policy, the challenge of our strategies, priorities of our self-reliance.

Militants,

I am hopeful that the message launched this year already beginning to be understood by many. But this is not - by far not - enough. We must go faster.

I am confident, as for me, the action of active teaching continues, controls and sanctions weighting, that with the introduced ethical reference and early ressaisissement found, sanitation public service and political will in the facts.

This is still not miss even the rendezvous with history - the next 25 years might be unbearable!

Following meetings with officials and politicians, we have drawn the conclusions, we took clear decisions, we gave guidance.

It would have made me great pleasure. Militants, if I could announce today that all decisions, all data directions are already all become reality!

Alas, it is not so. First because the economic circumstances worsen day by day, have rightly absorbed most of our efforts. On the other hand, some decisions require for their implementation additional efforts require more time than expected. For others, the actuation has been slower than desired. And perhaps that some deadlines have been set in a way too optimistic.

But things are moving anyway! And today I want to assure you that no decision or direction taken will not be changed unless it was for the better.

On one point, however, I must make one comment: it is the moral improvement of Public Service. As you could see, some administrative services have already experienced an early treatment to rule out once and for all some of the rotten elements, the most venal they sheltered, and others will follow.

There is no question that the ousted members may find new assignments within the Public Service, by the way, for example, horizontal movement! This would be in flagrant contradiction with our commitments to the desired consolidation! Everyone must learn to live the consequences of his actions; must accept the principle of sanctions; without sanctions, there is no way to manage or enforce ethics established. The "hijackers" public goods are definitely scratch the Civil Service. In other places of the kind of crimes are falling heads.

So many young people and adults, able, experienced, qualified or not, just waiting to be able to demonstrate that they are willing and able to work for the progress of RWANDA, they are willing to spend themselves without count for our country, so that our children have a future full of promise.

It is not now in the administration of non-productive elements, harmful sometimes not continuing to cultivate the spirit of patronage, we can prepare our future - our future which is that of our youth!

The year 1987 has enabled us to aggressively engage the moral recovery of Public Policy and Service. This will not be the least of his achievements as allowing us to progress rapidly towards the administrative reform in depth - real existential challenge! - and that will affect all sectors of the administrative and political life of our country. Does this not make next 25 years those of the town, those of the most efficient management, those exhilarating promise of a secure future, provided just the next 25 years are those of the participation of all the national work?

The year 1987 - year of symbols and promises, but year also, alas, major economic difficulties!

Economic difficulties, we talked often this year: the catastrophic decline in our export earnings, due to the collapse in prices of the three commodities that we export (coffee, tea, tin); due to the anarchy of the international money markets, represents a real fettering our economy, like all African economies.

These disappointments happen to us the year we hoped without much immediate concerns, singing the promises of our 25 years of independence - I see, in reality, a symbol and a warning:

the symbol of relentless struggle, desperate, we must continue to wage against the fundamentally hostile international economic system fundamentally directed against the interests of African countries - decisive condition of our underdevelopment; warning against any temptation to find solutions to our problems elsewhere than here, other than primarily relying on our own strength!

It is, in fact, the most striking legitimizing what we want "self-development".

Faced with the unprecedented crisis, your Government, Militants, reacted quickly and forcefully, without waiting for the always urgent instructions from the outside. The emergency economic plan, as I've presented on June 15 past, not only represents a major effort to quickly fill gaps, but it is also our reference of choice for bringing order in the management macroeconomic and we ensure complete control as possible of the most decisive economic parameters. And there, I feel that we are on track to succeed.

Once we have mastered these parameters, it will be possible, thanks to the planned restructuring of our economy, to develop approaches to reconcile the demands of real growth with the safe management of our economy. In 1987 we will be much closer.

Already, three things strike me positive, encouraging, despite the seriousness of the situation - three granted that I believe fundamentally promising and we can credit 1987.

The first achievement is the continued commitment of your Government, Militants, supporting the price paid to producers of raw materials exported, despite the dramatic drop in prices of the latter, and despite the obvious sacrifices that entails!

Whether we are able to do so and we also went further than we can go - is it not extraordinary encouragement, the evidence that we are capable of not compromising the rural purchasing power of avoid, as much as we can, to pay the innocent peasant producer, and working so hard to get some cash, to make him pay the culprits aberrations of the global economic system.

While our country is found, once again, behind our farmers - to guarantee them the achievements of their standard of living, it is our pride!

The second positive achievements of this crisis - is that it has allowed us to further refine our approach to the adjustment and restructuring of our economy.

Indeed, the crisis has forced officials directly involved to accept, once and for all, I hope, in all their consequences, the true realities of our economy!

Militants of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development - it is only by basing our strategies, policies, priorities on the true reality of our economy and well controlled - truly revolutionary attitude! - can we expect real progress, strong and durable! Living beyond our means - deadly temptation for our economies.

It is in this context that I said on 15 June: "If the current crisis could be this powerful revival, (...) reminding all their real responsibilities (...) it we will have been beneficial. (...) the way we'll get out of this violent crisis allow us to test the consistency of the foundation we have laid for our self-development. " This I said on 15 June.

I am even more convinced today. This year, RWANDA was able to strengthen its action on sanitation plan of economic management, prerequisite to any further restructuring.

Our approach from the concrete reality of macroeconomic management and the national economy, because it is only from this reality well understood conceptually and operationally, it is possible to design a possible structural adjustment of 'economy. It is thanks to the close interaction between macroeconomic and microeconomic behavior management that structural adjustment can only be the least positive impact on the reality of control of concrete economic behavior.

In this way of seeing things, budget strict management, judicious control of indebtedness, monetary stability are integral to any structural adjustment of the Rwandan economy as well as the management, as we understand , imports, integrated export promotion, including changing attitudes and behaviors, or other equally important vectors as the redistribution of economic and political power in favor of the municipalities, the mobilization of all forces around of economic defense, or the approach to truly participatory planning and foremost rooted in the reality of Commons.

The year 1987 has enabled us to see it more clear and proceed accordingly.

The third acquired in 1987 is the establishment of conditions controlling our term debt policy. The crisis of this year found a way could not be more brutal the extreme precariousness of our country, due to its debt.

The challenge is terrible; contradictions give a nightmare. Is it possible, is it understandable that by the same policies that claimed to help them progress, our countries find themselves increasingly in a real withers threatening to strangle us?

The problem basically is that the ability of our country to increase our foreign exchange earnings, which we return, is structurally limited - and the current crisis, and those yet to come, even deprive us the little we had.

Faced with mounting debts that need to carry currency, but it is difficult to obtain a surplus created by our export earnings, besides the fact that economic growth leads to the necessity of new imports demanding in turn larger exchange costs, deal with all this, the Rwandan government has taken drastic measures, starting with stipulate extremely restrictive conditions in which only the state can now take external financial commitments.

It is inevitable that the rigor introduced on this plan entails certain sacrifices for a while. But any other attitude would have been suicide because it would amount to accepting an economic slavery, trampling the honor of our people by forcing us to consider an international charity system that charity, like the motor gasoline our economies, condemning us to never be able to work this out.

And yet, we have a vital need for external capital, that is to say, strong foreign currencies, and are available in principle, but we can not continue to use them for our economy investment needs without that we have institutionalized guarantees reasonable and are in the interest of all partners allowing us to meet our commitments!

At the recent Summit of Heads of State of the OAU in Addis Ababa, RWANDA has made a number of proposals that have attracted the attention of other African countries, and that we believe are reasonable, they are possible, effective and in the interest of everyone.

In 1987 we will have been beneficial - despite the crisis, and perhaps through this crisis - because it has allowed us to speed up, for the greater good of our economy, making certain existential measures to anyway would have proved an inevitable day. We have won an extremely valuable time, we were able to react before the day it would have been too late!

Militants,

Let me conclude this review of the year 1987 and the reflections it inspired me, mentioning another area where RWANDA has made much progress, in accordance with the priority it has always given him c ' is the health of our children and the fight against epidemic diseases.

With the help of some of our friends, officials of Public Health may disclose very encouraging results both in the fight against certain diseases and immunization of all children from infants against major epidemic diseases.

Public Health officials estimate that in the framework of the Action Plan for a survival program and child development Rwanda, strongly supported by UNICEF, universal immunization of all children of our country is and excellent underway. The year 1987 will be consolidated bases.

You know, another disease epidemic type, of recent origin, and rampant particularly in urban areas - AIDS - rightly concerned about our women, our youth, our couples, responsible for public health, as all international community, as it is true that its effects may be terrible if we are not careful.

Thanks to the strong and courageous stand taken by the Government of Rwanda, earlier this year, it has been possible to mobilize a lot of resources, human and material, to information, to public education, prevention and the provision of means of prevention, and to encourage research on this potentially fatal epidemic.

Our efforts were not limited to only the establishment of an extensive public information program. Today, for all blood transfusions, performed in RWANDA, blood sera used are tested for antibodies, using the same scientific methods used are tested sera in Europe or North America. The Rwandan health authorities intend to conduct a comprehensive national survey on the state of the disease in the country, and will provide valuable data for the development of the WHO program road, supported by many donors.

In terms of the research itself, ongoing programs of undeniable interest, will know all one day more about this disease.

As I said last January will require that research is greatly encouraged that the signed agreements are respected, that the scientific results, and having the ethics in the matter, are promptly published that research conducted in our country can contribute to finding solutions - and this in the best interest of our country in the best interest of the countries of the region, where the disease is rife, and in the interest of the international community.

This will be our contribution to the solution of a problem of concern to health authorities worldwide. This will be the consideration that we can provide to the international community that helps us a lot in this area.

Militants,

The year 1987 - serious in its symbolic significance - ends.

The year 1988 is at the door!

At the dawn of 1988, I want to address all RWANDA and all RWANDAN anywhere at all Militantes and all Activists, my most cordial greeting, sincere for that the coming year is, had also a year of peace, a year of progress for each of you and the reasons for happiness, the reasons for satisfaction, especially the joy outweighs the rest.

My wishes warmest and most outspoken of peace, happiness and prosperity, I also want to present, on behalf of all the Activists and all the militants of our movement, to all members of the Diplomatic and Consular Corps at all responsible agencies and cooperation agencies, their families, their staff and their fellow citizens, the respected leaders of their countries, all aid workers and their wives and children, all volunteers, our religious and our religious, to all our friends working in RWANDA, and RWANDA, here and elsewhere, to all our visitors passing in our country today, telling all of you, with humility and sincerity, we know very well how your presence, your job, your encouragement and your critics, too, are indispensable. That's why we placed the 25th anniversary of our independence under the symbol of friendship and international cooperation.

particularly warm greeting and moved, I wish to extend to the people and their distinguished Heads of State of countries around RWANDA, that form our wider region, for the coming year is further evidence of the ardor with which we pursue solidarity, understanding and regional stability in the interest of all the inhabitants of this part of the world. In particular, we will need to continue to show the world, beyond friction or possible misunderstandings, we are inspired by an ideal of peace, we are able to solve our problems ourselves in order to prepare a future radiating peace, prosperity and solidarity which all our forces will be dedicated to the struggle for development understood in our region.

Rwandans,

It is exactly one year I said that the delay in the preparation of our new plan was not tragic, as this will do better, deepening and control of the process appearing to us more important than the result final form of the document is too often an alibi.

For a year, a significant number of meetings took place involving the mayors, prefects, but also farmers, women. It's encouraging.

However, do not that the process amounts to an exercise purely "media"! It is not enough to say what we would like, but one day we must first show how concretely we can do what we want to do!

The vital issue is to legitimize people's aspirations, design - once the structure of the state, the country, were able to consolidate, and so allow - to design a planning process, ie, is to say, implementation, mobilization, in a concerted manner, means depending on the objectives in time and space - a planning process thus enabling to organize reality common, according to the aspirations of every day and perception of emergencies by the inhabitants of Commons. Progress, real, tangible, and must take place where the people are, in our towns, the state continuing to take care of the implementation, concerted too, conditions specifically for designing an identified progress of mutual agreement.

This way of proceeding, the day she will actually also will result legitimizing the administration, and public policy! Should not - this administration - draw its final justification of how it fulfills what people expect of it, it responds tasks that people will give him?

The public administration and policy so far is a clear tendency to legitimize "from above" by the power at the top of the pyramid. It has thus developed through the eyes constantly fixed on power "from above", so that the "base", the "people", "people" you and I, if I dare say, have too often seemed like a kind of outlet for his own aspirations. Yet it is the basis which gives the pyramid all his strength, all his power. It is she who must legitimize the administrative class, the political class.

This I have also said on July 1 past when I expressed my conviction that: "Thinking administration from the base, to make it as endogenous as possible, so that it is the as close as possible administered, population and promotes by all means the participation of the latter in the work of development. "

This means all the challenge for the administration if it is to meet the requirements of our new planning paradigm. We have progressed a lot this year: the administration begins by being convinced herself that she would convince others!

The process must continue, must assert and deepen materialize. Although this causes a delay in the timetable for the preparation of our Plan.

However, where we must move forward very quickly, it is in terms of the completion of certain national strategies, such as infrastructure, such as telecommunications, the industrialization, areas where a more coherent strategy should we serve as a reference.

Finally, some friends-donors who are worried about not getting quickly from Rwanda a document-level, I would say today that we are very sensitive to their concerns. We do ask them to try to understand the vital issue for the RWANDA of the new planning paradigm and help us rather to realize it.

In addition, for the moment, I was not even reported that donors would be difficult to find areas of intervention useful to our country!

I believe it is in the best interest of our donors themselves, friends forever, that we develop ourselves how best to organize ourselves and to be consistent in what we want to promote . A new document-plan is necessary, I agree. But the political orientations of Rwanda in development are well known and priorities, as all that is of this international cooperation so active, so intense and we keep saying every day that it is exemplary and we could not do without.

Militants,

The year just ended was on the theme of food self-sufficiency and we saw there the realization of all the efforts for so long and to which we have devoted each year a specific theme. The year 1987 was therefore both consolidate all special efforts, the incentive to continue and complete them for the result of these efforts actually be food self understood - leitmotif of our overall effort planning, for all that we undertake in the different sectors converge to this existential objective, namely, that we can feed ourselves and increase our standard of living.

The year just ended also saw a very promising start mobilizing our shared, our farmers for their more direct, more director in defining their own interests, to enable them to take more and more control of their destinies, to organize increasingly to argue, to defend their interests. Give the power to decide to those who have to live the consequences of their decisions about how to improve their standard of living - relying on its own forces first to advance its cause - it's the epitome of a successful development !

The year 1988 will be decisive in many respects - in particular in terms of how we continue and consolidate it takes to promote our self-development and live intensely.

Militants,

You will therefore not surprised to learn that we put 1988 in the logical and psychological continuity of what we have undertaken, that sought the mobilization of the rural world, its lifeblood, allowing ever more crystallize this quintessence of our self-reliance. A successful self-development that allows to promote in our rural areas all the intrinsic forces that dynamism, proving that he can organize things better, he can defend himself and his interests ever more effectively, to acquire power that rightfully belongs to improve his lot, his standard of living and thus satisfy its growing material and spiritual needs.

In other words, it will be for the farmer, and the farmer, for our young people - for all the rural areas! - to organize themselves in order to capitalize all the efforts made for so many years and to allow everyone to defend their income and to increase the efficiency of its work and sacrifices.

The year 1988 will be "IN DEFENSE OF INCOME FARMER!"

One of the best, if not best way to do this is the one that stimulates, prompting the rural to organize its own forces to defend itself by tapping into its most authentic values, and its clean, which actually allows him to say, and take charge himself.

The coming year will thus exalt the resources and own assets to the rural world in defense of its economic, social and cultural.

Self-organization of rural, rural self-promotion, self-defense in rural areas, are notions that we must achieve if we are to move forward quickly.

This will indeed trigger a process to farmers, which allows the rural areas, to become strong by itself, because it has the means. There is a year I have already said: "Every day, it will strengthen the defense of our farmers and producers to find new formulas, new actions, new types of organization, for the farmer -éleveur

Organize yourself to become stronger - it is valid in all fields in rural areas, in the world of our artisans, as well as in urban areas: places where people come together to do something, to create a work, to defend themselves, defend their interests - success can not be far away.

In the area of ​​production, for example, various forms of association can be powerful factors of development, whether in the organization of field work, whether the practice of cultures where in times of seeding or weeding, or harvesting, the efforts put together would save time and money for everyone. Why the same sectors or the cells do not they would put not to favor this form of work organization?

But this solidarity can extend to other work: to improve housing, to the rotating contribution to allow each member of the group to have access to certain goods. Does not-there are a host of associations, cooperatives, people have created self-help organizations to strengthen their shares of production, but who do not receive the attention of the authorities? Is it normal effect that the job cuts in several municipalities do such at the expense of supervisors of cooperatives?

Many youth movements, civil or religious inspiration, could become the spearhead of the creation of productive activities for these young people.

Why do parents of a cell did not they would put together to guide their children completing the CERAI?

Similarly, in the field of marketing the mobilization of credit, lack of organization can only be very detrimental to peasant producers. If farmers got together, they would arrive to defend much easier to deal with abuses of some traders and get a much more lucrative income. If the producers got together in associations, cooperatives, they could defeat those who want to enjoy their work so they could sell at the official price and buy their products at a reasonable price at the time of seeding. All this would have a positive impact on their income.

For obtaining credit, the collective joint guarantee may also wonder: this is the group that gets credit and distribute them to members. Thus, to avoid the farmer the anticipated sale of its production, formula of credit - welding, developed by the Popular Banks, the joint guarantee, can unlock significant funding for each, and the farmer will lose more easily fear of credit.

Other forms of credit are possible to acquire a motor bike, to improve housing, to finance the education of children ... As soon as people get together and agree to take their destiny in hand, there will be all the credit he will! Why the parents of a sector-they could not guarantee the loan to a cooperative of its children?

If such associations can encourage the development of their members, they also facilitate other structures. For example, as craftsmen who have created their own popular bank, one can imagine other popular banks or other mutual funds. Bank or mutual military, bank officials, the teachers, women - why not?

It is jointly we can achieve a rapid response to most problems to solve.

In terms of cultural, social and educational, new methods of organization should be adopted. Self-defense rural concerns not only lucrative activities! Associations to promote the education of children can be created by the parents because education is not only provided in school. Parents can discuss within such associations freely constituted for their children coaching methods, parental relationships - Students face of modernity; they may agree to organize the cultural life of the neighborhood kids.

One of the major problems today is that education is left solely to teachers and to the state. If parents associations followed their business, I am sure that we would see more of teachers at 10 am in cabarets! This requires that parents also changing mentalities and deal effectively with the education of their children. Associations can help them.

Associations can also strengthen social constraint and ensure that the behavior of young people, adults conform to morality. The example and experience is always the best teacher of life of our youth.

Associations may well play a catalytic role in the socio-cultural life of the community!

Even in the area of ​​justice and security, solidarity associations can to revitalize the community's ability to resolve social conflicts!

If our courts are being overwhelmed, it is because any dispute is brought before the judges. So if the community managed to erect its own patches necessary for a harmonious life - if, for example, raised the informal courts can resolve some conflicts - then there formal courts could easily spend the most complicated cases. Why not recognize the authority of the village patriarch, head of the family which surely would resolve a number of conflicts that clutter our judges. The use of village elders, taking into solidarity and collective empowerment of some problems that are the responsibility of justice, associations, even informal, activists of a certain age, can help resolve various conflicts.

The organic defense of citizens is a deterrent, very effective as rural and urban, adopt inexpensively!

There are few areas Militants, where solidarity, where the association does not allow the interests of each, for the greater good of the community. Together we are strong! Associate, jointly, because we have common interests, this is the best self-defense in rural areas. This is the best way to be heard and to succeed.

So. Militants - and excuse me for myself down into the details here - any sense that we would give to the theme, the slogan of 1988! It will take during this year this growing consciousness take shape most effectively by setting up whatever is necessary to defend the rural environment through the resources of its own! "1988 for the defense of the Peasant income."

And this slogan is also a powerful questioning of all our local, regional and national, to design approaches rooted in our own culture, to design their actions, their functions as essentially serving self-defense, self-organization of rural areas by its own forces, that they support them with all their might, with all their enthusiasm, with all their commitment.

The theme this year is also an additional legitimation of our new planning paradigm. He acquires this magnitude will make its originality.

The theme this year is a prerequisite, but also an indispensable support for the efforts of the ministries involved primarily in rural areas - there are a host structure and organization supported by the people themselves, it which will be the best guarantee of the success of actions promoted by these departments, and others.

The theme is also a powerful factor in promoting agricultural production, since producers of interest will be better served, which is a prerequisite for our agro-industrial strategy can develop and prosper.

Militants,

The year 1988 will be an important year for the future of RWANDA. You will, we will have to elect a new President of the Republic; we will have to elect a new Parliament. These are major dates in the life of our young democracy. In a few months will be the Sixth Congress of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development!

The year 1988 will be particularly busy. I invite you now to think about the challenges facing our country and how to cope. This is the challenge, but also the promise of 1988.

I wish you once again a great year.

God bless each of you. God bless each of our family, God bless our country.

For ourselves, and Rwanda do, throughout the year 1988 also, every day a step forward.

Vive le Rwanda Live And all his friends.

