Militants,

July 5 marks for Rwandan people, the triple anniversary of our national independence, the advent of the Second Republic and the founding of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development.

Today there are 26 we recouvrions Independence and we get into the concert of free nations, 15 was born the Second Republic 13 years and has been founded the National Revolutionary Movement for Development.

The advent of the Second Republic was synonymous with the rise of a continuous period of peace and national concord; he was also a synonym for social development, unprecedented economic and ecological; it was synonymous finally the affirmation of our country as a state of law where justice works, where freedoms and fundamental rights of citizens, the free expression of opinion is guaranteed!

The day today, especially to commemorate the birth of the Second Republic, is for us a day of great joy, a day of pride too, because we realized that the socio-economic progress, self-development, the advancement of social justice are all dependent on peace and national agreement, political stability and shared conviction by us all, that progress must be equitable progress for all, open to progress all within the reach of everyone!

Militants,

This is what was our belief, our deep commitment since the 1973 events that led us to take the responsibilities that have become ours, that have become mine, in particular.

This overwhelming responsibility of guiding our country, RWANDA, towards genuine self-development, you Militants you have entrusted to me in the past.

There are some days, the National Revolutionary Movement for Development VI Congress renewed its trust me again, I will have, on this occasion said that I am willing to assume, again, that terrible responsibility and this in accordance with our unwavering commitment to our country, to our sense of responsibility, also in accordance with our belief, my conviction that everyone, according to its possibilities, must accept the sacrifices he may accept that it must accept the service of our country at the service of our people in the service of RWANDA!

15 years of service to the promotion of a well-designed progress of our country, the Second Republic has always stood by his will, by his constant concern to the greater consistency in all it would take, aware of that only the maximum of our development efforts consistency we will ensure that progress is the appointment, that the gains remain truly won forever, that through the concerted commitment, despite the means and resources reduced that are ours, we can accomplish great things!

If I5ème anniversary of the Second Republic makes me think that consistency, existential under - the consistency of our national development policy, the coherence of the whole of what we call our self-reliance, consistency also within each of our policies and strategies, consistency even in our own behavior - is that I am convinced, deeply convinced that even more than before, consistency will inspire us, guide us in what we will design, in that we will undertake in the future.

Better, the consistency will become the true emblem of the Second Republic, it will be the symbol par excellence of the next Parliament, its major source of inspiration, because consistency means: efficiency of government action, optimizing the use of our resources, maximizing the desired effects, the expected result!

Consistency also means eliminating any waste of resources, time and effort!

Consistency is the key to the success of our policies and our strategies!

Therefore consistency will become the leitmotif for the next term, so it is the best bet to defeat the terrible challenges ahead as we enter the second quarter century of our existence.

Today Militants, I will not make a long speech! I made a lot these two, three years; many speeches addressing all sectors of national life, all the forces that make up our country.

And these words, all these interventions of the President of the Republic had a goal - you know - to promote, set in motion a vast educational and consensual mobilization indispensable mobilization precisely so that everything we do, everything we will do also is consistent, as concrete as possible.

Establish a consistent frame of reference where everyone can move, without being limited in its initiatives, proposing a consensual approach allowing everyone to get together and draw for animated by what contributes most to the advancing progress, it can knowingly causes, become an instrument of development for the company, which is always the best guarantee as to its own development!

The time seems ripe for so that we place under the banner of coherence our future development efforts, we do, today met the preconditions semblance, coherence thoughtful the leitmotif of the legislature to come to that consistency becomes not only a source of renewed inspiration, but it becomes a major objective in itself that we must aim for much more than before, in everything we undertake!

For we are all convinced of the importance it has to the greater consistency in our priorities in our policies, in our strategies, I intend now to put the campaign on the theme of consistency - consistency also meaning and above all a major effort in terms of co-responsibility, in terms of consultation.

I will try as well, during my visits to various prefectures, to illustrate, in a privileged way, the various topics that I shall address, in terms of consistency.

Today Militants, I will very quickly go through a few themes of domestic policy that will focus our primary attention in the new legislature.

One of the major topics will be the one of our municipalities. If, in accordance with our commitments, the town must become the main axis of our development, so really the next 25 years should be those of the town, a huge effort will be needed, conceptually and on the operating plan a reality of this major political priority!

Where to start this effort for innovation, creation? Where to start for us to find the best way to start this process in practice, after which, truly, the town will become the mainstay of our development?

Obviously, it is not today that we could answer these questions definitively. The answer to these questions will itself be an ongoing process that will mobilize everyone at every level of responsibility he is!

The rapid updating of the law on organization and functioning of the municipality, the rapid establishment of the new municipal credit system facilitating the common access to finance basic facilities, the consolidation and intrinsic strengthening of municipal finances are first decisive steps towards increased servicing of our municipalities.

Alongside the implementation of these essential management tools and investment, and for reasons of obvious consistency, effort undertaken as part of our planning will actually be intensified so that the town is increasingly the center Similarly, the nerve, the heart of our planning efforts.

In the new paradigm of our planning which will definitely absorb his seal of effectiveness the next Parliament, we will have, on one hand, the strategic references macrosectoral areas such as infrastructure, education, telecommunications, opening up, domestic areas a strategy quite consistent and meet our needs well-defined, depending on resources and progress of our development, will serve as a reference and inspiration for our priorities and negotiations with our friends donors.

On the other side, we have a process, a process constantly redefine, reinvent, to allow it to better organize reality still common, according to the aspirations of every day and perception of emergencies and priorities by residents, Militants themselves; Here, for the leaders, it will be to support the efforts of municipalities to help them by offering them a way to do, ideas that allow them to build on what is already done in other cities, etc. ...

This, Militants, I have often said. I will return to them today, except to wish that many years of encouragement, exhortation, the same injunctions are not lost. Several years of patient waiting, as it is true that a new paradigm in this delicate matter what the planning is not easy to promote to the weight of the past, are not useless. We need to print, from the next legislature, pace and fertile essential for our common become truly the center of our efforts to participate and planning!

If the town has become the center of our development efforts, it is essential to go beyond a simple project wish lists compilation, inventorying desiderata, the collection of complaints, statistics recording the making known !

If the town has become the center of our development efforts, it is she, the town, which has become the focus of his organization, the engine of his support, the same inspiration for its own development, the State can not but help but never substitute for the efforts of municipalities themselves!

Simultaneously with the deepening of our approach to planning understood our self-development, an equally important effort will be needed in terms of the financial structure of our economy, and again for reasons of obvious consistency! In fact, the reorganization and consolidation, as well as the subsequent strengthening of municipal finances, in turn, requires the reorganization of the national financial system.

In reality, the current dysfunction of the financial system of our economy is demonstrated, for example, that on the one hand, there is liquidity glut that seek only to place, and the other a need capital urgently, credit, financial resources which is not satisfied!

It will be important to bring the financial system of our country to generate much more mobilized financial resources for national development efforts, many more financial resources for economic operators, public or private, have access to the means ensuring their essential growth of as much resources to the state treasury to overcome some of its difficulties through recovery, to its advantage, financial resources at its disposal, which are his, but the current organization rather that they cost him they relate to him.

It will therefore be to unite our efforts, first, to ever develop the Treasury building, adapting it to the peculiarities of our economy, and secondly, to develop the banking system based on the legitimate needs of our traders.

Thus, in terms of developing the capacity of the Treasury, it should lead quickly to an end the draft revision of the law on public accounting, and shall provide including better cash management of the State using all the funds belonging to him, and integrating different funds (road Fund, forest funds ...) while ensuring their management by a specialized service, placed for example from technical ministries.

This will allow the state to have more cash in his account so far. The increase in cash could result, for example, accounting integration of project funds to the account of the Treasury. In addition, while leaving the management of these projects to their respective officials, their accounting treatment in the national budgetary framework would better predict operating loads and especially recurring expenses, incumbent on the State at the end of the projects, which could eliminate the well-known bottlenecks and to which the State may be confronted, bottlenecks that often forbidden to complete the effort in the framework of a project.

Also under the principle of consistency that will become pervasive concern in what we always do better in the future, other areas will require from the start of the next term the greatest attention to what it priority will be done as effectively, as efficiently as possible, according to our priorities.

Thus, the cooperation strategy which will guide us and guide us in the next term will be finalized very quickly and subject to discussion with our donors.

The priority placed on the development of our common involve the cooperation should be rethought from the town, with the town; the town will become the link, the transmission relay our excellent cooperation in the future; at least she will become his interlocutor, which will require considerable innovation efforts of both sides.

Also, if the increase in autonomous fiscal capacity of our economy is a goal in itself, immediate and vital, it will take more than previously considered an important criterion to measure the real progress made by our economy as while the increase in autonomous fiscal capacity determines our deep autonomous capacity to develop, then cooperation here too will increasingly develop its activities so that they contribute more and more to increase by a decisive and sustainable manner our budgetary capacity!

This may mean, in some cases, a considerable revision of some current practices: the project design plan would it not be appropriate, for example, not to approve a project if more intrinsic financial feasibility study will demonstrated that the project, once delivered to the Government, may survive financially but also under what conditions it could do to ensure financial autonomy in relation to the possibilities of the state or of the community concerned, while detailing, if necessary, the regulation of shared ownership, where it is necessary, subsequent recurring fee?

As far as the privileges enjoyed the projects and technical assistance (tax privileges, exemption from all kinds of taxes and duties, etc.) should we not begin by reviewing current practice because it can be assumed that basically the normal situation is the one that wants the imports even related cooperative projects, will one day be treated as all imports, that is to say, minted rights corresponding customs or assistance technology is increasingly subject to national rules and treated less special island exclusive privileges?

But for these new financial resources can be channeled to productive employment and not be swallowed up in the expenses of sterile operation, because they would then worsen the overall situation of public finances, it will develop innovative formulas some could be experienced from the next legislature.

But there is a precondition for this, namely, the total control of our budgeting, total control of the operating budget for it to be as rigorous as possible, mastering also conceptually and operating of all domestic financial flows in order to organize them according to the national development imperatives.

Rwanda, aware of the importance of proceeding coherently in recent years, made significant progress in this area, and that bodes well for even greater progress and future will be just possible due to consistency with which we made in the past.

Militants,

It would be possible to continue to demonstrate any decisive importance, pursuing a specific goal, and if I chose, these were some aspects of communal issues, deepen seriously conviction and the political implications of the requirement of consistency. These implications should be thoroughly well known, if not even the best goal in itself is not sufficient, as such, to ensure its success.

If today I allowed myself to highlight this order has always been short, for those responsible for the Second Republic, consistency in everything is that it occurred to me, on reflection, that it is precisely through our belief, our same obsession, consistency as quintessence of the Second Republic pursued policies consequently from birth, as we can, Militants of soon make great step forward, because we can build on the gains 1 5 years of perseverance, preparation, patient development of what was needed for that, 25 years after regaining our independence, we possible not only to guarantee the acquired significant hard-won, but also to consider the future with confidence everything is a significant improvement for all of our standard of living, sensitive and continuous improvement!

All this vital issue in the next Parliament: is it all, in this debate, we invite the election period before us!

I invite you, with alacrity. Militants, to discuss these issues of consistency, whatever the field, with the candidates MPs who will appear before you!

Trust those you are confident that they will represent you best, those that seem best to dominate the requirements of consistency in those also and above all that you think have best understood the great issues of our society, precisely those that seem to provide the best guarantees for the understanding of our self-development, as we continue to advocate, to discuss, to deepen, to those also whose honesty, incorruptibility you proven and seem to be the best insurance for increased morality in public life.

I would of course have taken a different theme than the municipality to illustrate the consistent effort it will take to provide the town the pillar of our self-reliance. I could have taken any other field: culture, for example! Since culture is a little like the soul in the body. All that our country has in place, and all it will continue to develop, both in the economic, social, ecological, political, educational or institutional, has always drawn and still draw his justification, his merits, his inspiration from the cultural essence of our society!

For 15 years, I myself, in almost all my interventions, exalted our cultural values; I found myself the fundamental inspiration and vigorous that animates us in everything we do; our cultural values ​​are the foundation of the dignity and national identity. This will ensure enthusiastically in the legislature that will come, that everything we undertake come from deep in our cultural essence!

Another example might have been the expected revival of national instructions of a political nature, for they do not ossify, so that they questioned constantly, for their functioning, redefined objectives respond to each new era needs new and the new aspirations of the people, that is to say, our Militants.

It would have led to talk of how a politician, for example, must fulfill its tasks, must meet the expectations of the whole nation and not just those of his region or his personal appetites.

It would have also led to talk of professional ethics and policy that should be the one responsible, how they must sublimate their own enrichment desires and put all their enthusiasm to serve the country.

Militants,

Of all these issues, and others I would have the opportunity to debate during the election campaign, as I have already said.

Today, it came for me to submit some thoughts inspired by the consistency that I would like it to become the emblem of the Second Republic, for consistency means: co-responsibility, cooperation, participation . In reality, our policies, beyond the necessary coordination they imply, will become better still good political policies, in truth - the day we all live in ourselves these values ​​in our cultural essence!

The triple anniversary we are celebrating today we have helped convince us even more, and to take the pulse of the challenges ahead in this regard.

Militants,

I wish you all of you a beautiful day, full of joy, full of confidence in our common future will only be bright if we all contribute to it with the best of ourselves, for ourselves and our children that will follow !

DUTERE Imbere MU Majyambere VIVE LE M.R.N.D. ! VIVE LE RWANDA! LONG LIVE THE COOPERATION BETWEEN PEOPLES!

