Militants,

You just re-elect me, almost in UNANIMOUSLY at the head of our country, for a term of five years. You have now approved the recommendations of your delegates to the VI Ordinary Congress of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development who, having elected me to a new appointed head of the MRND, I was appointed, in accordance with our Constitution, as presidential candidate of the Republic.

It is with great emotion, but also with a lot of confidence that I address each and every one of you to express my sincere and heartfelt thanks to the tireless support that you all do not cease to give me if generously.

But I must also express my satisfaction and especially thank the mayors and prefects who have watched, as we recommended to play the game of democracy, and which have not left the pitch by political slogan 100%, some, guided by an overflowing enthusiasm, well-intentioned, no doubt, would have wanted them to become the official score of this important referendum.

The maturity of the people of Rwanda has been proven. Our people need not be squeezed in this respect. He will know himself, sovereign, which is in its interest, and everyone is supposed to judge, and judge according to his own conscience! It is this fact that we have always spent most of our commitment and of our struggle.

Militants,

The overwhelming support that you have renewed me I interpreted primarily as encouragement for total we start in our path to understanding progress, I called, on 1 July 1987, on the occasion 25 years of the Republic of Rwanda, as being a true spiritual revolution. Your strong support will enable me to harness myself to this vital task for the future of our country, assured of your unwavering support.

It is safe for your continued support, sure of your moral support that now we will be able to embark on this task will be the essential inspiration of the legislature comes and in which the moral improvement of public management will be the first priority.

In this regard, I am pleased to announce today the creation of a COMMITTEE OF HONOR IN PUBLIC ETHICS I will make public and functioning, and the names of people who sit there, as soon as the Presidential Order relating thereto will have taken the step of the Government Council.

The first task of the COMMITTEE OF HONOR IN PUBLIC ETHICS will finalize the draft CODE OF ETHICS IN PUBLIC MANAGEMENT, to be among the first texts, if not the very first text on which the new Board national Development is deliberating. This will give us the first tools to realize our program.

Militants,

In a few days will be the parliamentary elections. I appeal again to your insight for you to give preference to those candidates that you are convinced that they will work for our country, for the public good, rather than for their own pockets, to give preference to those ' are you convinced that they also represent the best guarantee for the conceptual and operational control of our self-development, mastery of consistency that we needed and the issues it represents true that you give preference to those also candidates whose honesty and incorruptibility you seem proved and thus constitute major insurance increased moralization of public life.

Above all make sure that your ballot has been properly filled. Ask, if any, to those in whom you trust, your children if they know how to read to your friends that you are safe, that they help you, if necessary, to fill in the ballot paper according to your specifications . Do not be imposing names; first take notice of all the names on the ballot and then choose according to your conscience!

If you are depending on your consciousness, it will be for us the best assurance that our new parliament will be up to the requirements, he will be able to meet national challenges and meet our basic expectations!

Militants, supporters and sympathizers,

I wish you all of you with all my heart, a very happy Christmas, in your families and friends.

May God continue to bless our country.

