Militants, Friends of Rwanda,

The year 1988, saw his last hours endorse in the history of our young country, some meaning.

It was not only the last year of a parliamentary term characterized by a series of highlights, for a major modernization effort in many areas, for the preparation, in depth, which will be a new legislature of major progress, since it will have done much to put in place the structures and instruments of renewal for considering confident our future.

The year 1988 was also a year of decisive political events in our country.

The many meetings with the business world, in the first half of the year, with the population and the mayors were to show a government determined to do what it takes to put our society on the road for the next decade.

That this effort of reflection and mobilization could be upstream and downstream of the 25th anniversary of regaining our political independence was only symbolic, only more meaningful!

1988 has been another year, unfortunately, big economic difficulties, due mainly to continuous fettering of our economy, and that of all the countries of our continent, fettering exerted by the international commodity crisis and the monetary anarchy.

That despite this, despite the harshness of the crisis, we have managed to maintain fairly widely the rural purchasing power, we could witness a severe economic activity domestically, including through the construction field, to swarm the craft sector and small industry, thanks to the emergence of many private initiatives contributing all to revitalize our economy, we have been able to make progress, despite the most unfavorable external conditions, we must prove, militants, the potential and promise of our self-development!

It is understood the commercial sector, and due, which will have been affected more than other sectors, since the tightening of currencies was necessarily feel; and against the loss of currency there is, alas, no miracle cure.

That's why your government waived pseudo-solutions that not only would have brought no additional currency, but that would have endangered some of our macroeconomic balances and for the restoration of which we would not have disposed of answers adequate.

Your government will continue to defend our economic achievements, to design its policies with the utmost circumspection, and not engage in changes to balance when it will be sure to master the implications.

Rather than seeing an ultra-conservative attitude of another age, as some would have us believe, we would see it rather advanced vision for our best interests.

On the agricultural front, 1988 we was favorable, reflecting abundant rains, though, especially towards the end of the year, they were of unequal distribution. The Rwandan agriculture has continued to help feed the people of Rwanda.

But the rains had many a tragic setback. Floods and landslides have resulted in significant excessive rainfall in many of our Prefectures. Everywhere, the effects have been disastrous, causing the loss of many lives, many homeless, a lot of damage, not counting the infinite sadness and deep sorrow that these tragic events caused by any and all Militantes Activists, and especially among those most affected.

At the end of 1988 we want to still devote time a thought moved to all those who lost their lives and to those who suffered from the natural disasters.

We would like to renew our gratitude to international cooperation whose generosity, once again, allowed us to respond to large emergencies.

International cooperation, we have still enjoyed a massive way with the arrival of Burundian refugees. This massive influx of Burundian refugees has been an extraordinary challenge for the people of the region that was most affected, that of Butare. While Rwanda was proud of the generosity of the exemplary dedication, exceptional selflessness shown by the people of this region that is also known to be already heavily populated.

Rwanda, once again, thanks to the people of Butare, and its leaders, showed the image of a dignified people, hospital, listening only to his heart.

The problem of the refugees now seems about to find a solution, no more that Rwanda and its people can rejoice more.

The tragic events of this year and highlighted an extraordinary learning: it is the spirit of solidarity that emerged so spontaneously, generously, and that made all Rwandans helped, each according to his means to make a mark of solidarity, its contribution to relieve the inhabitants of the affected regions of our country.

this spirit of solidarity has been the greatest conquest of 1988 on the human level.

Militants,

The year 1988 has also been a year of intense political activity.

The VI Ordinary Congress of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development was an opportunity for a major development of major policy issues and other of our national development. Delegates did a great job, defending with passion, candor and conviction aspirations of those who elected them as their representatives. A significant number of resolutions were able to pass and that will inspire and guide the work of the Government.

The VI Ordinary Congress was also to elect the President of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, which became thereby even your candidate in the presidential election, according to our Constitution.

The launch of the campaign allowed the President of the Republic to visit each prefecture to present the main themes of the future government program, gather opinions and suggestions from the public, and, basically, to reaffirm the contract binds the people of our country.

Of those 10 games, I removed primarily two impressions: first an immense feeling of joy and pride to those jubilation so superbly spontaneous and that seemed to be evidence most compelling membership of the people Rwanda to the ideals of peace, understanding, dialogue of our Movement and which are the basis of real progress that can be found everywhere; a sense of joy and pride, yes, but also the conviction that our progress will keep going if our population continues to be the best developer, if it continues to take charge of its own shares, in themselves -organisant, becoming its own project manager! Government action could then find the multiplier element par excellence!

1988 - political year, since there was December 19 presidential elections, and on 26 December parliamentary elections.

I wish Militants, to reiterate my thanks to you today moved for the trust you have renewed me. I will do everything to continue to make me worthy.

My gratitude is not only going to the Rwandan people as a whole for returning me to the head of our country, it is my profound gratitude also acquired for demonstrating the finest maturity that is, that is to say , which is to choose, freely and according to his conscience, those he deems worthy of representing within the parliamentary institution of our country: the National Development Council!

This eloquent testimony to the vitality and promise of our democracy is also found in dignity, calm and the seriousness with which you have discharged your duties as citizens in these elections: presidential and parliamentary.

I would like to thank, most sincerely, on behalf of us all, and in my own name, all Militantes all activists, and to pay tribute to their outstanding civic sense, a sign of a people capable of assuming the responsibilities their own destiny!

After these elections, we can be confident the new legislature. The challenges ahead are huge!

This will be fight with all our courage, with all our conviction, for an even better future, a future reassuring for our children. To make this happen, it will, with more relentlessly than ever, we devote body and soul to the task of our self-development!

For us to succeed, we must, animated by this existential passion which we have already allowed to enjoy every day, their benefits, continue to cherish with enthusiasm, continue to cultivate with care, continue constantly to deepen, enrich our major national virtues, namely, PEACE in our society, the SAFETY of our country, and the national CONCORDE AGREEMENT!

The day after the publication of the results of the presidential election, I announced in my address of thanks, the establishment of the COMMITTEE OF HONOR IN PUBLIC ETHICS, to develop initially a preliminary bill on "Code of ethics for public management" that will provide the Government in a period not exceeding three months from today.

THIS CODE OF ETHICS will make major instrument in our fight for the moral improvement of public administration and policy, in accordance with decisions taken following my meetings with officials and politicians, and announced in the conclusions I had drawn on 1 June 5, 1987.

Thus, the CODE OF CONDUCT become, as we have specified, the ethical standard for all who hold positions in the administrative life and politics of the country, because we made the ethical sanitation one of the foundations of our spiritual revolution.

Now I have the honor to announce the members of the HONORARY COMMITTEE appointed INTUITU Personae: The Honorary Committee is composed of the activists:

Mugemana JM Vianney, current Minister of Justice, NTASHAMAJE Antoine, current Chairman of the State Council, Mujyanama Theoneste, Head of Department at the Presidency of the Republic, RUSIBANE Gaëtan, Dean of the Faculty at the National University of Rwanda, Augustin Ndindiliyimana , Officer of the Rwandan Army and current Minister of Youth and the Cooperative Movement, NTUYENABO True, MP and former magistrate, and activist MUKANGABO Aurea, Vice-President of the Court of Appeal of Kigali. The Presidency of the HONORARY COMMITTEE will be assumed by the Activist: Mugemana John Vianney.

The chair of the COMMITTEE OF HONOR will be assumed by the Activist: Mugemana John Vianney.

The composition of the Committee of Honor could be reviewed as soon as the Code of Ethics which is finalizing the first mandate of this committee, have crossed the stage of the National Development Council, the Code could, indeed, redefine the tasks of COMMITTEE thus its operation.

Militants,

The year 1989 is ahead of us!

Let me wish all and all RWANDA RWANDAN anywhere at all Militantes and all the militants, a year of progress for each of you, a year of peace, a year when reasons for happiness, satisfaction, joy outweighs everything else.

On behalf of all the Activists and all the activists of the National Revolutionary Movement for Development, I offer my warmest wishes and most outspoken of peace, happiness and prosperity to all members of the Diplomatic and Consular Corps, to all responsible agencies and cooperation agencies, their families, their staff and their fellow citizens, the respected leaders of their countries, all aid workers and their wives and children, all volunteers, our religious, in all our friends working in RWANDA, and RWANDA, here and elsewhere, to all our visitors, passing in our country today - by telling you, sincerely, that the Rwandan people deeply appreciate your presence, your work, your commitment, as your thoughts that we can measure the way forward in the march towards our self-development well understood.

-particularly warm greeting and moved, I wish to extend to the people and their distinguished Heads of State and Government of the countries that surround RWANDA, countries that form our wider region, for the coming year is further evidence of the eagerness with which we pursue solidarity, understanding and regional stability, so that all our efforts are devoted to the only goal that matters:

the fight for development understood in our region.

Militants,

The proximity of the opening of the new Parliament, which will be presented the program of your government provides me today to talk about some themes that I used to deal in this right moment the passage of a year to year, especially some problems of the administration and the issue of our planning.

This allows me to address immediately the theme that will inspire us for 1989.

Militants,

The year just ended was placed under the general theme of the mobilization of the country in defense of peasant income, to clearly show our political commitment to promoting rural environment said.

This theme placed at the center of our food self-sufficiency strategy, subject to the potentially revolutionary implications, as it is true that the assumption by the peasant, the farmer's own interests, power it needs to acquire defend, can upset ways of thinking and fear the worst for those who consider the rural environment is not able to identify its own interests - this theme with potentially revolutionary implications, I say, has done just beginning to show the scale and scope that should be his, if he is truly to meet all the conditions for the income of the farmer can actually be defended.

Since the birth of the Second Republic, an unprecedented effort was able to mobilize the rural world, which made it possible to adopt the basic techniques of population for improved agriculture: erosion control, mixed farming, reforestation , exploitation of marshes, use of agricultural inputs, even if the cost of the latter is still very high in front of the farmer's purchasing power. But the fact remains that the vast promise of the 1988 theme "Defense of the farmer's income" iS not yet exhausted: it only to be interviewed. That's why we decided to keep this major theme of political mobilization in the press, by supplementing it, highlighting one of its more specific aspects.

So we decided to put the year 1989 under the "YEAR OF self-organization"! Defense farmer income by the self-organization of rural areas.

The defense of the peasant income through self-organization of rural areas and highlights the idea that the peasant, organizing with others, which itself becomes the best defender of its interests, his income! For defense of peasant income, this does not mean that the farmer-rancher, the farmer, the farmer would have nothing to do while waiting for such administration just defend them in their place!

This, I think, we all understood, as we understand also what the administration can do to facilitate the peasant defense of its income, and especially not to prevent him from defending it, or oppose him obstacles, consciously or unconsciously!

Self-promotion - self-organization - the rural world reminds us that the best promotion of rural areas is still one that found its own resources, its own energy, its own strengths, its own motives in the same rural areas - is the secret of self-development well understood; it is also the promise of a self-centered growth!

It will be so in 1989 build on the conceptual assumption that the theme of last year helped win; and he will capitalize in 1989 on the first concrete effort to develop and they can lead to others.

The theme of the defense of peasant income through self-organization and boost than last year, so that the movement launched for the defense of peasant income is not interrupted in its tracks so he can take all its scale and materially influence both the behavior of rural increasingly aware of the development assets that are his, and sustainable improvement in its purchasing power.

That's all the promise of this year's theme - "YEAR OF SELF-ORGANIZATION OF RURAL" strengthens perfectly well that of last year, while fostering a critical aspect.

Militants,

1989 will see the opening of a new five-year term. During this legislature, it will be as we have made a commitment to achieve a "spiritual revolution" so that we can ensure 100% that we will be able to control the exorbitant challenges ahead of us, we will succeed in our self-development to offer our children a healthy society, a strong economy, a country where they will always be proud.

Militants, Friends of Rwanda,

I wish you once again a great year.

God bless each of you, may God bless each of our families!

God bless our country so that it can continue to make a step forward every day throughout the year 1989!

VIVE LE RWANDA LIVE ALL FRIENDS OF RWANDA!

