In his closing remarks, the founder president declared that at the end of their working session, he and all those who had met at party headquarters in Kigali were fully convinced of the exceptional seriousness of the current economic crisis. However, he immediately added: We are all convinced that we are going to come out of the crisis victorious if we commit ourselves to doing what the circumstances require us to do. And we are going to win, for we have to win the struggle, and above all, surmount the current crisis, however much fate may be against us.

President Habyarimana said the officials’ awareness of the seriousness of the current crisis and their eagerness be transmitted to others, instead of remaining solely the business of the authorities, and it should rather become the business of all Rwandan militants.

For our head of state, the crisis is there to show us the prime importance of the intrinsic national financial capacity, which henceforth will have to occupy a privileged place in our economic policy. All that will have to be done henceforth will have to be conceived so as to enhance our intrinsic financial capacity. He directed the relevant departments and services to develop the economic policy of our country in that way, so that it can become the prime strategy of our 5-year plan for economic, social, and cultural development.

The founder president emphasized the urgency of the measures to be taken in order to avoid the worst happening, to face better the foreseeable shocks of the crisis in the course of next year. Leaders of the Second Republic unanimously agreed on the pertinence of such measures, and on the timeliness of the measures, decisions and programs adopted, which fall harmoniously within the context of our strategies, which were formulated by technical experts of the relevant ministries.

The founder president, however, stressed two important aspects, namely, the management of foreign exchange and the precarious food situation prevailing in some of our country’s regions. The stock of our foreign exchange is currently limited, the president said. There is, therefore, an absolute need for unimpeachable financial management, in order to make a parsimonious use of foreign exchange, for positive results. It will therefore be necessary to review all the planned investments, so that no single currency is committed for no purpose. Some infrastructural work can be frozen or delayed if necessary, while clean and clear use is made of import credit lines.

On the precarious food situation, particularly in Butare, Gikongoro, and Kibuye, President Habyarimana gave assurances to his people. Hundreds of tonnes of food had been made available, and emergency food aid the government had requested and obtained from the international community was awaited. The main concern, he said, and that is the concern of the government and the Rwandan people, is to make sure that no one dies of hunger. In this regard, he hailed the dignity and self-control of the Rwandan people.

A meeting with all our creditors should be held next January, in order to negotiate with them a recovery program for our national financial capacity. In this economic development program, we will have to reconcile new foreign exchange needs with accurate production objectives, to permit the improvement and boosting of the economic structure, and acceleration of the cleanup operation which has been in force for some time now. The document to be presented to our creditors must be accurate, with objectives in figures, with all the details on foreseeable effects, on the macroeconomic level. Among other things, we will have to reinforce environmental protection and the intercommunal development fund. Bankable projects nearing completion will have to be promoted, [sentence as heard] Exports will be diversified, and production of local goods and national resources will be enhanced to meet local needs.

Finally, the document to be presented to the creditors will contain an important section devoted to the balance of payments and internal financial adjustments. The Ministry of Finance is charged with compiling the document with the assistance of other relevant departments. The work must start without delay, the president of the Republic said, while all the other departments concerned with the adopted recovery measures must start speedy implementation of all that has been decided upon.

