Today I have come to urge you to continue to support our soldiers who are in combat. You know well that since 1 October 1990, there was soon more than two but enemies from a neighboring country attacked us by surprise. They thought they were in Kigali after three or four days.

These "Inyenzi" came from the Republic of Uganda and disposal of weapons and ammunition that many of you have seen. I think the youngest among you not familiar with the history of "Inyenzi", or even what means this term. Indeed, for years, we live in peace and harmony without fear of any kind; most of us had forgotten the past actions of "Inyenzi".

Historians write of Rwanda which Rwanda was of Old people first arrived as Batwa hunters. Then entered the country Bahutu clearing the forest and developing agriculture. Finally came the Tutsi, after the two other occupants in search of pasture for their cows. These cows will serve them to install a monarchy symbolized by the royal drum "KALINGA". The domination lasted long. When the Hutu became aware of their situation, they gradually came to challenge the monarchy.

In 1959, they finally refused. Thus was born the revolution of 1959. Some young people may have not experienced this period; this revolution was that of the people who repudiated the monarchy. The people then instituted the Republic on 01/28/1959 in Gitarama. He was the knowledge and the eyes of the world. The majority of the people's representatives spoke against the monarchy. The steadfast partisans of the monarchy took the road of exile, fleeing the revolution and fighting the establishment of the Republic.

This is the origin of the refugee issue. Rwandan refugees started fleeing the revolution of 59, supporters of a monarchy that a majority of the people refused, opponents of a republic that most of the people had set up. Thus arose the question of refugees.

Installed outside the country, refugees procured weapons, established the training camps to attack the young Republic. Thus began the issue of "Inyenzi". The "Inyenzi" are those refugees who settled outside of their country, began to organize militarily to retaurer royalty. They attacked the country over their times.

In 1962, just after independence in 1963, 1964, 1966. Or a lot about Mutara this last time: you'd be surprised to learn who was the former head of Mutara in the attacks.

This is to Nshili. Bweyeye and Kibungo where "Inyenzi" attacked to overthrow the Republic established by the majority of the people and restore the monarchy. The same is true of the recent attacks: They claim they bring democracy have nevertheless fled.

They fled the regime chosen by the majority. They fled the will of the people. How can they when the claim teach us democracy, despite their illusions of winning the war.

Thanks to the positions they hold in neighboring countries, their military training in the Ugandan-many armed forces have occupied important positions - they took arms, ammunition, military vehicles and other types of materials to attack Rwanda with the intention of restoring the monarchy. They claim to come and teach us democracy as if Rwandan even aware of the term. As if they are not democratically elected their leaders; as if they had no without progress. It's their way of understanding democracy.

Democracy is not to destroy or to impose their ideas by force of arms. They hoped the easy victory, thanks to equipment and training acquired in the NRA when they fought in the Ugandan armed forces.

But now, despite everything, they again lost.

The purpose of my visit here in Mutara and elsewhere in other operational areas is to give you my support, to congratulate you for your bravery, reiterate the confidence and hope that all Rwandans put in you.

During this war, we have lost people they must remain in our memory. Rwanda can not forget them. The officers, non-commissioned officers, corporals and privates who gave their lives, Rwanda must remember. It is imperative to continue to think about them in order to better revenge. We will avenge our belief that any enemy that crosses the border of Rwanda will be destroyed. We will avenge them by following the example of their sacrifice, continuing to show the courage that Rwandans are capable.

I have you recalled that in the recent attacks they thought conquer Rwanda in two or three days. As if Rwanda had no armed forces. Maintain the memory of those who fell in battle: officers, NCOs, junior ranks. The Rwanda will take care of their children, their wives, their orphans. The Rwanda - and I speak for all Rwandans - not to forget their wives and orphans.

This is the best way to honor their memory. Our thoughts also go to all the innocent civilians killed in the war, especially in areas of Byumba and Kibungo. You remember that in the Byumba region but mainly in the Kibungo region, the Inkotanyi attacked unfairly civilians. These, too, we can not forget, Rwanda can not forget them. Rwanda must remember, the revenge, keeping in mind that they fell on the battlefield to save Rwanda. Rwandan put their trust in you, put their trust in their armed forces. The Rwandans, especially the youth, we urge to train them militarily, so now we are no longer surprised, despised by the enemy who thinks to seize the country in two days. The young people say their strength and ask: to be initiated in weapons that, in time, they participate in the defense of the motherland.

This position is right. It is a program that should make for a greater number of combatants. But these must remain arming operations compatible with other needs we could have sufficient weapons while the salt is lacking in peasant, clinics lack medicines, so that there is no drinking water the hills.

We must plan everything but progress and development that Rwandan gradually reach must be defended so that they are not destroyed in a short time by the enemy. Every citizen, every Rwandan to have the harvest of his field beans must laying the harvest of his field beans should be enjoyed in peace, without fear of being disturbed because protect its armed forces tranquility. It is this objective that Rwanda, a homeland for all, the home of the Banyarwanda. The Rwanda is Gatutsi, Gatwa, Gahutu.

Every morning at the flag raising, national anthem reminds us every time that Rwanda belongs to all Rwandans. Tutsi, Twa, Hutu. This is true of Rwanda for which we must fight; we must build.

Wars like this raises serious problems. We will respond to the story of how we defended the homeland. This is what I wanted to talk to you today, reiterating the confidence of all Rwandans in you and us. They support you and are assured that you will defend them with determination in all circumstances. Even the hilltop youth want to join you.

In particular, in the area where we are, when the cleaning job seemed to end, the people were told that the Inkotanyi are hidden in the park; that our victory was not total as would organize incursions from the park. Now you just do the complete cleaning of this enemy by remaining there is already a corpse.

Now I ask myself the question: if they attack or Kivuye Byumba, where do we tell them to come? (To stabilize the situation), this implies a policy of good neighborliness, the end of armed conflict, the return to peace on the borders. It is the task arduous course, that assigns the Government. Moreover, we have friends abroad who will help us to explain the actual situation since, in Mutara, there is more "Inyenzi". They will have no more arguments to support that this is the park that go against attacks Kivuye or Butaro. Because usually it's what they say. I would also like a part of you join their units while reiterating confidence that Rwandan place in you in all operational areas.

I came to visit you today in Mutara for I can not be everywhere at once. Nevertheless, in all areas, Rwandan trust you. I thank all the soldiers who participated in the battle; in some areas the work is finished, some returned to their respective camps.

To all of you I say that Rwanda is proud of you. You have the proof on the airwaves of radio through the songs extolling the virtues of the Rwandan armed forces. This shows the confidence of Rwandan against us, against the Rwandan armed forces. I hope that this confidence of Rwandan deepens. They will trust us if we continue to be disciplined, if we continue to defend the country. Some may be concerned about the future of our country. Especially the early days. Today, soldiers have shown proof of their determination. If they continue on this path, they will deserve the confidence of Rwandans and no enemy would dare cross our borders.

Long life.

