Habyarimana said it was impossible to forecast outcome of current Arusha talks; Rwanda hoped international community would help with repatriation of refugees.

Asked about the ethnic conflicts, the President of the Republic said that before the current war Rwanda only had one ethnic group the Rwandan ethnic group. But, unfortunately, the war came and everything was challenged our peace, our national unity and our economy. The result was that we had to rebuild.

On the integration of RPF [Rwandan Patriotic Front] elements into the Rwandan army, the President of the Republic recalled that this issue was on the agenda of the Arusha-4 negotiations [to follow the current round of talks] ; they [the RPF] must first lay down their arms and after that the modalities for integrating them into the Rwandan armed forces would be examined. But one thing had to be made clear first, he said it was not a question of a merger between the two armies. It was a question of integrating the Inkotanyi [the RPF] into the national army which had already existed for years. This integration should also be conducted while respecting the laws governing our national army and it should take into account the country's capacity.

Certain African countries had opted for either elections or national conferences in order to embark upon démocratisation. What was Rwanda's choice on this issue? The President of the Republic, Gen Juvenal Habyarimana, said that each country was organised in accordance with its own context. Rwanda had already initiated its democratic process [words indistinct] made by the President of the Republic in contacts with employees and all the strata of the population. It was at that time that political renewal started. Today, we had a transitional government formed by five political parties this resulted from the adoption of a new constitution establishing a multi-party system in Rwanda. So, only the elections remained to be held, he said.

On the holding of a national conference if desired by the Rwandan people, the President of the Republic described himself as being ready to bow to the will of the Rwandan people.

Ladies and gentlemen, deputies, Rwandan men and women The government's responsibility is also engaged, and in the most serious manner, in reaching a good conclusion to the political negotiations with the organisation [RPF - Rwandan Patriotic Front] which has attacked our country. . .

Thanks to the pressure exerted by a number of countries friendly to Rwanda, another cease-fire agreement was finally signed in Arusha on 12th July. This cease-fire, which was to come into effect on 31st July, is today being more or less respected by our aggressors. I [word indistinct] in the border region, infiltration and shelling continue sporadically, while the truce which was to have preceded it was violated from the very first hour.

The neutral Military Observer Group [MOG] which is to supervise the cease-fire implementation is being put in place. The special commission charged with coordinating their activities has started its work.

As for the negotiations themselves, I would like to set the record straight on the misunderstandings which have been created and reassure the Rwandan people of the position of the Rwandan government.

The Rwandan position will remain - unless the Rwandan people choose otherwise when they are consulted - based on the defence of the respect of the constitution and laws, and the defence of the respect of state institutions, whether executive, legislative or judicial. There must be a relentless continuation of the democratic process in progress in our country and the defence of and respect for the transitional period. These principles were unanimously endorsed by the government and followed broad-based consultations with the political and social tendencies in our country.

The team of negotiators the government sent to Arusha was fully instructed in this respect. Precise instructions were also given to them so that now, more than ever before, they might adopt a language of national consensus, so that the positions they adopt are no longer improvised and so that cohesion can be achieved.

This is why I think that the Rwandan people can rest assured that all the precautions have been taken to ensure that individual actions do not lead our country into an adventure it would not like.

Ladies and gentlemen, Rwandan men and women a few days ago I addressed the nation following a campaign of lies launched by some political parties who sought to discredit the commitment of the Rwandan government and the President of the Republic and their resolve in the negotiations regarding their major mission of safeguarding internal peace and security and promoting and strengthening national unity. On the same occasion, I requested of the Prime Minister, and I reiterate the same today, that he clarify the confusion existing between the roles of the Ministry of Information and of the Rwandan Information Office which should be, as we have always wanted, an organ [as heard] for the objective and non-partisan dissemination of information at the service of collective interests. This confusion was highly prejudicial and was even about to poison the atmosphere of internal peace. Some of the decisions [of the Ministry of Information] were also taken without any consultation and contrary to any rule of politeness and dignity.

I then had to calm down passions and I announced that with regard, for instance, to the presidential commentaries [reference to earlier broadcasts of excerpts from presidential speeches] , I would personally take a decision in the near future about the pattern of the messages the president of the republic addresses to the nation, in accordance with Article 44 of the constitution.

I have thus decided to allow the press and information services of the presidency of the Republic henceforth to use the presidential speeches, which are an obvious constitutional prerogative and are supposed to meet [word indistinct] expectations in accordance with the president's responsibilities, (?in order to) reinforce - more than in the past - professional relations with the national press, both the official and the private press. . .

Mr President of the CND [National Development Council - Rwandan parliament] , Mr Prime Minister, deputies, ministers, members of the diplomatic and consular corps, honourable guests, Rwandans

The solemn ceremony at the CND to mark the swearing in of the new deputies provides me with an opportunity to talk to you about two themes which are the main preoccupations of our country, these being the internal political situation and the negotiations with the organisation which attacked Rwanda. . .

The current government, as of today, has been in existence for about 100 days - the period which is generally allowed to a government before it is criticised. This is because it is believed that such a period is needed for a government to build the basis for the realisation of its programme called for by the new society. This period having expired, what actions by the government are now worthy of criticism?

Deputies For my part, I have no doubt that the government has done many things to commend itself. I congratulate it on this. Its achievements include the fact that it still exists, tries to function and solves daily problems. This has not been obvious, but it gave us boundless hope. Problems exist, but we all try to do everything we can to encourage the government in its endeavours to restore peace and understanding in our country. Let the government be assured of the support of all Rwandans and persevere in providing evidence to prove itself worthy of the trust vested in it.

As I said on 2nd April 1992 when the new Prime Minister was appointed, in forming a government of openness to exemplify the transitional period, I responded to the conclusion our people collectively arrived at namely, that unity and understanding always win over disunity and misunderstanding. However, in the face of the threat to the very existence of Rwandan society, national cohesion has acquired a new meaning, because the collective interest has become the supreme motivation.

During its lifespan of nearly four months, the transitional government has done its best to strengthen our country's credibility by seeking to normalise relations between Rwanda and its neighbours.

If we accept pluralism and what is to be expected of it, which is what the Rwandan people want, the game must be properly played. We must be farsighted and keep the ship on course while it is battered by unavoidable waves, winds and storms, to ensure it does not sink. Honourable deputies The ship has not yet sunk, but the dangers threatening to overwhelm it are not absent. Today, unfortunately, the risks are as great as ever. It is my duty to alert you to the dangers our country's management faces today so that steps are taken to ensure that our ship - that is to say, our country, that of our children, our motherland - does not founder in the turmoil of a wrongly understood pluralism. The dangers in effect are clear today. I can see them as existing at three levels. Firstly within the government I deplore this. The discipline and discretion which should characterise the work of the Council of Ministers, the government's solidarity on decisions to be taken and those already taken, on consultation, on the consensus which should characterise the decisions already taken, are breaking to pieces. This is due to intrigue and scheming, lack of respect for the rules of the game as defined in the agreement signed between the parties making up the government and disregard for the constraints, requirements and dispositions of the constitution. . .

A government which has lost or is in the process of losing its credibility is in a dilemma, because this is the sign of a great trouble to come. I would therefore like to recall that there are rules stipulating that the administration be as independent as possible from the political power.

By taking more inspiration from the spirit of the government programme and with greater respect for the constitutional provisions it will be possible to avert the first type of danger I can see and thus we shall be able to maintain a steady course in guiding our country towards a sure future. In effect, this will make pluralism a success. Thus, by exercising our common will to work together, we shall proudly make a real success of the pluralist experience, for which Rwandan future generations will be grateful.

Honourable deputies, the second danger posing a threat to our achievements and to our ship - and this has happened repeatedly - arises from the tendency by members of some political parties to take over the role of the public authority and that of the state and its institutions by elevating themselves above the law and the wishes of the people in disregard of the rules democracy. The worst of such transgressions are terrorising the countryside to persecute the peasant, who is our main producer, providing us with our livelihood and daily bread, unleashing panic in communes by stirring up racial hatred; and [word indistinct] with the local authorities by putting pressure on them with physical threats to make them abandon their functions. What is particularly grave, unacceptable and totally incomprehensible is that a number of senior officials seem to enjoy doing such things. They do everything possible to inflame minds and incite their members to commit violence so as to trouble people's minds in the hope that disorder will ensue. This ought to be condemned, I believe. But they hope to profit from their destructive acts.

Honourable deputies, Rwandans At this grave moment, I call on all Rwandans to keep the peace and not to allow themselves to be misled by troublemakers from any party. I call on all Rwandan citizens to remind the political authorities [as heard] about the rules of ethics and reason with those who like being misled and acting excessively so that collectively we shall be able to halt all the wrongdoings as the result of misinterpreting the rules of the democracy game. . .

This is why I renewed my call on the government to finalise the quintessential instrument of democracy - the electoral bill - so that the population can be reassured that our country finally has a valid electoral law to enable the various political parties to prepare with full awareness for the elections due before the end of April 1993 in accordance with the agreement signed by all the parties participating in the current government. Any delay in this respect must be regarded as a delaying tactic. . .

Ladies and gentlemen, deputies, Rwandans The third danger that may cause this ship, namely our country, to sink is a totally incomprehensible phenomenon it is the destruction, blockade and boycott of our country's economic activities in the name of political freedom. Here again, and very often, there are excesses by the members and recruits of some parties - excesses to be blamed [words indistinct] - a disgrace committed in the name of the struggle to bring their parties to victory, in the name of the political competition, in the name of I do not know what.

How can one reasonably consider and conclude that by stopping a farmer from selling his produce, by blocking roads or barricading routes leading to trading centres, that one is working towards the victory of one's political cause? [Passage omitted need for the opposition parties to behave responsibly]

For as long as the language used by politicians remains unclear and ambiguous it will be a double- talk used to excuse their anarchic behaviour. The existence of political parties would be a smokescreen for this.

As long as there is this ambiguity, as long as efforts are made by members of the government - and other civil servants or those posing as such - to have members of their respective political parties, who have been found guilty, released (?just because) they are members of their parties, as long as the action of the government risks being jeopardised for lack of credibility, and as long as security and tranquillity in the country are not restored, then, ladies and gentlemen, we will have - all of us together - strongly to denounce such excesses and oblige the political parties to respect unfailingly the democratic ideals as they are perceived by the Rwandan people. . . [To be continued]

In concrete terms that agreement concerns only the conclusion of a truce and the agreement on the ceasefire came into force on 31st July. Obviously this ceasefire requires the setting up of a neutral group of these military factions. This is the concrete aspect of this agreement. Other details were raised but they will be discussed after this cease-fire comes into force the future of the members of the Patriotic Front, the participation of the Patriotic Front in the running of the country, the problem of national unity will be considered in talks which are to start on 10th August.

You cannot open the door of a room which is barely lit and pretend to know what is in the room. You have hardly reached the door you have to enter and explore all comers to know what is in there.

I believe that since talks haven't started yet, one cannot venture to pretend to know what every notion involves. So I believe that talks should be left to unfold to decide the terms more precisely and also to see the implementation of all these notions. What I can say is that we have a coalition government with five parties which is working so, it can be enlarged to any other political current.

The investigations are still under way, but unfortunately there were certain elements, there was a certain amount of infiltration perhaps, perhaps also a certain amount of disinformation, and certain elements, because these are really very few, as all this looting was stopped by the other soldiers who felt that this was an infringement of discipline and that it was also an infringement of the understanding between the army and the population. So, I can not but regret it, I asked that the inquiries be carried out so that the guilty elements can be punished and we can really learn the true causes of this state of affairs.

The principle itself of talks with the RPF is acceptable but we can say at the same time that it is the Rwandan government which leads the negotiations, and which commits the Rwandan people. It is not the parties which govern, it is the government which governs. Secondly, all these parties which came to Brussels had previously publicly denied having any contact with the RPF, but by coming to Brussels they showed that their previous statements - that they did not know the RPF and that they were not in contact - were not entirely truthful. Thirdly, I believe that when there are five of you, you sign a joint government programme, and after signing this government programme which reasserts the intention of seeking peace and negotiations with the RPF, three of you slip away leaving two parties and you do not even inform them that the three of you are going to negotiate, then I believe that there is no longer any base for a coalition.

I do not know about that, because the negotiations have not yet begun, I do not know what conditions they are going to take place under or what the outcome will be. There are the different authorities, there are the technical teams which are going to negotiate, there is the government, there is the parliament, and there is also the party, and so I do not see at what level I could come into it, but perhaps I should intervene at some points. [End of recording]

