Long live our President Habyarimana Long live yours Movement activists of the MRND in Ruhengeri I thank you!

Mr. President of the MRND, Mr. MRND National Secretary, Ministers, Mr. Deputy Prefect, representing the Prefect of Ruhengeri, Distinguished Guests, Activists of the MRND.

On behalf of the MRND committee in Ruhengeri and on behalf of all the activists of the MRND in our prefecture, I would first ask you to join me in thanking the Chairman of our party. Mr. Juvenal Habyarimana. Even if I ask for the second time, I considered necessary because it is the first time, as part of the MRND rallies, he finds time to visit the activists of the party the support.

I would also like to greet you and wish you peace and unity which are the unshakable pillars of democracy. Even if the peace that had long prevailed in Rwanda, was disrupted, thanks mainly to the armed forces that we are still alive, that we can come together here. Please join me in thanking all our armed forces. Please applaud the cl cheer for the dedication they have shown to us avoid a defeat. I also pray to get up to observe a minute of silence in memory of our fallen soldiers at the front. So far Rwanda does not become a territory of Uganda by the blood they shed (one minute's silence). Thank you. Please have a seat.

Mr. President of the MRND, Mr. MRND National Secretary, Activists.

Please join me in thanking all those who helped us organize the ceremonies that day. Among them, there are those of contribution is to raise the necessary funds, I would cite the commission headed by Deputy Telesphore Munyaruyenzi who organized the ceremonies, the MRND committee in Ruhengeri, the Inkeragutabara-Urusengo troupe Nkumba, Interahamwe and all of you from all corners of the Ruhengeri Prefecture and other prefectures in Rwanda to attend this meeting. You deserve applause and cheers (applause and cheers).

Distinguished guests. Activists of the MRND,

Our party is doing well in [prefecture] Ruhengeri because the number of members exceeds 90% of the inhabitants of Ruhengeri meeting the conditions for voting. For this reason, some political parties are eager to use force to compel our members to join their news. These same parties continue to use all the tricks to achieve their goal. When they do not tell lies, they insult our youth by saying that the MRND has transformed into a monster. They say that we refused the other parties to locate in Ruhengeri, as you know, our prefecture, the parties MDR, PSD, PL, CDR and PDC will have members.

When they do not reach their goals, they write and circulate press releases in order to defeat our meetings. However, they forget that the members of the MR ND are guided by their conscience and belief.

I think you see yourselves that releases the MDR circulated yesterday and before yesterday had no effect. Do not you see that this stadium was packed to the point that some people were forced to go follow the rally behind the stadium V Please help us thank all the supporters.

Unlike the writings of MDR in Ruhengeri leaders who spread lies, people who fill the stadium and the rest following the rally outside, are not displaced from Byumba. We ask these brothers do cease to use lies and ideas that seek the destruction. Instead, they must remember that if we work together, we can use different ideas to build our country and strengthen democracy. Defamation and division are contrary to democracy and destroy our country.

Activists of the MRND,

Since June 1991, our policy is based on multiparty democracy. Rwandans welcomed with great joy this policy because they believed that freedom of expression, respect for human rights and research interests of the population would have citizenship in the country. But the current situation is very deplorable. Some political parties who claimed to want to bring more great now in the disruption of security. When we hear about the atrocities committed in Cyangugu where one of the MDR leaders at the national level, not afraid to bribe the young men of his party so that they go on fire, destroying houses and commit killings, we wonder where we're going.

You also hear about what is happening to Nvabikenke and even in other prefectures that it is not necessary to appoint. One can even start with the capital, Kigali. The youths of the parties have been manipulated so that they are not afraid to engage in acts of barbarism, destruction, killings, looting, which acts only hamper our development. Any party that indulges in acts of barbarism and killings can not win elections even though they would force members of other parties to join him. When you force someone to join your party, you have a temporary servant but you do not have a partisan (applause and laughter). And deeds ... (Inaudible). I take this occasion to ask the members of the MRND, especially our youth, youth of the MRND, to be characterized by discipline. I ask them to avoid any action and behavior contrary to democracy.

Mr. President of the MRND, Mr. National Secretary of our party, Distinguished Guests Activists of the MRND.

Although this seems to be that day of joy, we regret that in Rwanda there are more than 400,000 displaced by war. Ruhengeri has more than 100,000 displaced from ccs. Many thanks to all Rwandans who are dedicated and who collected the aid to the displaced. I also thank the countries and international organizations, not to mention the Government of Rwanda, who have done everything possible to assist the displaced.

However, we know that this support is not enough. It is far below requirements. Please continue on this path in order to be able to help da \ anlage our brothers and sisters, displaced by war. I said that we are sad because our strengths displaced live in poor conditions. Indeed, they do not have enough to eat, they do not have shelter, those who are living in makeshift shelters and do not envy those who give the stars. Many children have not yet been able to return to school and even those who are returned, lack of suitable premises. Within our MRND, we hope that the peace talks are accelerating for reaching an agreement acceptable to all Rwandans. This would end the war and displaced persons return to their property.

I would like to also mention a very worrying problem of traders in the prefectures of Ruhengeri and Gisenyi whose property was destroyed and looted. The President of the Republic and other authorities wanted that all traders receive interest-free loans so they can resume their activities. However, our party is astonished that so far the Government has nothing to leaking concrete that traders Ruhengeri, Byumba and Gisenyi can resume their trade activities. I wonder if some people do not want there to be other traders who come to trade here. We urge the Government to actively deal with this problem for our traders to resume their activities.

Activists of the MRND,

It is unfortunate that we Rwandans from within can not agree on what we expect negotiations [Arusha] When some people want the negotiations to take place in transparency and democracy, others want to take the opportunity to make a "coup" in Arusha where negotiations take place or they want to include force in all peace agreements that they could not keep quiet move to Kigali. The MRND party campaigning for the early return of peace in Rwanda so that after the signing of peace agreements, the first activities should include the return of IDPs of this war in their property. The agreements signed between the Government of Rwanda and the Inkotanyi 3U October this year include points that the parties MDR, PL and PSD have included strength, while members of the Government were not agreed on these points.

Our party is satisfied that the parties forming the Government can not claim the right to exclude other parties in the government that will be set up. They can not say they arrogate to themselves the power to appoint another party that can enter the Government. We believe that .... the parties should agree on this point. But the time will come when the parties will show that they have members on the occasion of meetings like this that has great support. The MRND does not accept that the current authorities, including the prefects, sub-prefects and mayors, were arbitrarily dismissed from their functions to be replaced by others that some parties want to propel posthaste to those posts .

(... cut) ... integration of Inkotanyi soldiers in the national army, the return of displaced persons to their property and the return of refugees. 11 These are difficult issues. But if we work with zeal and foresight, we come to agreements accepted by all parties. I would like to once again remind that we strongly want a rapid return to peace but this requires that some political parties do not blinded by hiding their aims, which sometimes tend to deliver the country to the Inkotanyi. Currently, there is they seem in their aims, trample democracy. The architects of the surreptitiously referred want to make a coup and sit dictatorship they condemned. Activists of the MRND, the persecution of some members of our party. Recently we learned that some officers in education are to be made redundant. One reason for this persecution is that they are members of the MRND party, MRND Our insists that before dismissal, there is valid reason justifying the replacement inspectors sectors. If these reasons are proven true and reasonable, nobody will oppose it. By cons, if it is proved that these people are injured, our party will mobilize to help them seek justice done to them. 11 there will be no alternative.

because they show that they are members of the MRND. We welcome the fact that the competent bodies of the university are addressing this problem. We await the findings. Anyway, the MRND will closely follow this issue and will not accept that one is a victim of his belief especially when you do not break the law.

We also have other supporters persecuted by parties who are determined to make them lose their posts. Among these supporters, I would mention Kajelijeli. I think his case is known. I also cite the Rucagu Deputy, Mpiranya the mayor and many others I can not mention all because there are many. But we know that there are political parties decided to dismiss some of our authorities here in Ruhengeri. We believe that to sue someone ... but I repeat that the MRND will not tolerate that people are persecuted for their political ideas, their political affiliation. We can not tolerate their being persecuted because they were mobilized for rescue and firmly support their party. I plaice you join me to show these men our support and assure them that we will continue to support them. Activists of the MRND, we live in difficult times that call for prudence and foresight. The times we live in require coexistence and tolerance between people, even those who do not speak the same language. Current times require us to understand democracy in the same way and avoid acts of provocation. We must be equal before the law and always remember that we worked hard to reach the Republic, independence and democracy. If we are not careful, if we continue to tear each other apart and us to be distracted, we lose everything.

There is only one solution. The MRND, we hope that there is more insecurity. The only solution is that the peace negotiations will lead quickly to the elections ensue directly.

We want elections! We want elections! We want elections! Activists of the MRND,

I would again like to express my sincere thanks. I would not say that I have exhausted every subject but I think the MRND National Secretary will complete me. I ask simply that we continue to be marked by la discipline. Our party must be characterized by peace and quiet but no one should interfere with our party in its activities. Our party represents the interests of its supporters. If there are people who are harmed, we must, in discipline and in accordance with our bylaws, we mobilize to demand through legal channels that justice is done. Before concluding this speech, I would like to say that since we talked about the elections, as we have said that we want elections, we must prepare. If necessary, our party has to start choosing, with foresight, competent people that will be elected in the coming days. I notice that you seem to worry {laughs). I will not make the campaign today.

Be careful ... be careful ... who do we vote for President of the Republic? Who do we vote for President of the Republic? Who is our candidate? Who is our candidate? I see that you understood. I have nothing else to add. Thank you.

We apologize, ceremonies began before the arrival of the guest of honor. We kept presenting guests but we feel necessary to present some guests eh ... even if you've seen some of them.

I ask the president of our party to come again here before that the fans who had not been able to see much Applaud please! Applaud much please! Applaud much please! Applaud much please!

I ask that they get up to greet the crowd of supporters (applause, cheers).

The following, even if you have the opportunity to see him clearly when he goes to speak, is the MRND National Secretary. I ask him to come here to greet you

As I told you, I might make some mistakes in the presentation because I did not have it prepared. I would then ask the members of the MRND national committee from all corners of Rwanda before coming here to greet you. Applaud much please! Applaud much please! That ... that ... that ... Eh..excusez me a bit .... do we hear in. I will ask you to do one by one, about two steps ahead so that we can to see you.

I'll start with those closest to me, I pray Mrs. Gaudentius Nyirasafari forward. She is a member of the MRND national committee and hails from Ruhengeri The following is the university's vice-rector, campus Nyakinama. He hails from Kibuye. I ask him to move forward to greet you. Next Eh..le Nzabagerageza is Charles, the former prefect of here The following is the Secretary Member of the National Development Council. 11 is president of the MRND in Kibuye Prefecture The following is Dr. Jean Baptiste Ndalihoranye, a native of the prefecture of Giscnyi. He is currently advisor to the Ministry of Health The following is Juvenal Uwilingiyimana, Director of ORTPN you. He hails from Gisenyi; The following is Mrs. Immaculate Nyirabizeyimana. I would like to present completely. She is Vice President of the National Development Council. She is from Byutnba The following is the Minister Callixte Nzabonimana, Minister of Youth. He is a native of Gitarama (applause). It makes daily face our opponents. The following is Ngirabatwawe Augustine, Minister of Planning. 11 is a native of Gisenyi (Applause The following is someone who has been bullied a lot lately so there are people who went to destroy his house. This is V entrepreneur Claver Kamana. The entrepreneur Claver Kamana is a very famous man in Gitarama, he faces every second to our opponents when he makes the campaign of our party next is Jean Damascene Hategekimana, director of the social Security Fund of Rwanda.

I do not know if I presented all the boards but I must have done it.

The prefectural committee of the MRND 20 members. You notice that it is composed of men and valiant women. However, I will not present them one by one. I would ask them to greet you. You will greet your turn and cheer.

I would ask members of the MRND before coming here to greet the crowd of supporters of the MRND. I'll start .... they come again. I'll start with those on my right:

MP Augustine Basebya, from Ruhengeri Maniraguha Lucia, who is also MP from Ruhengeri Gahimano The Colonel, MP from Gisenyi The Immaculate MP Nyirabizeyimana you that I've just presented time. She is from Byuinba Ntibitura The Colonel, MP from Ruhengeri

I will now present those to my right

MP Télésphore Munyaruyenzi, a native of the town Kigombe Next is MP Boniface Rucagu, a native of Ruhengeri Next is MP Sebastien Rusimbukande, from Ruhengcri The following is Dr. Catherine Nyirabahufite, MP from Gisenyi Next is the MP Cyprian Munyampundu, Secretary MP from Kibuye

I thank you, you can return to your seats.

I ask the 16 mayors to come here before to greet you (inaudible) .. that help me to lead the party in the 16 municipalities in the prefecture of Ruhengeri. I also call on subprefects here who support the MRND to greet us (applause and laughter). I apologize, as I said, to accelerate the ceremonies, I will not present them one by one. But I would like to inform you that all sub-prefects and mayors all of our 16 towns support the MRND are here.

(Cut) ... Robert Kajuga, president of the Interahamwe at the national level. I asked him to come also be present.

I.e there voi voi .... the there, the Interahamwe leader.

Thank you, thank you, thank you very much. Well ... here there is a diary written by the Interahamwe. I read it, it is well written and contains interesting articles, was brought here a lot of copies. Each copy costs 100 francs only. Well ... we were told that there is another newspaper called Kamarampaka. These two newspapers are here. I ask the supporters to learn more by reading the newspapers.

