Rwandan men and women: You have heard that on the night of 7 January the rebels once again attacked Ruhengeri and Byumba, while the Rwandan Government was attending the peace talks which have been continuing in Arusha since July last year. This is very painful. You know well that we have done all we could since the war broke out on 1 October 1990 to ensure the end of the war through negotiations. You all remember that we called on friendly countries which helped us reach the N’sele Agreement in Zaire.

As I have just said, on the night of 7 February, many rebels attacked Ruhengeri town through the Birunga mountains and mainly pounded military camps in Ruhengeri, such as those of Mubona and Muhoza, in the course of which they killed people and took others prisoner. They also attacked the Ntaruka central electricity power station, and the electricity distribution point at Gifurwe. In the Kirambo area, also in Ruhengeri Prefecture, they attacked the Rwandan Armed Forces’ positions at Ruhanga and Ndago. In Byumba, they attacked Miyove, and proceeded to the communes of Cyunga and Tumba, as well as to the Base trading center, which they fired on throughout 8 February.

In the same Byumba Prefecture, they also attacked Rwandan Armed Forces positions at Nyabishambi and Karambi and at Kitazigurwe, from the night of 7 February and throughout 8 February. They also shelled Kibali hill at Byumba, and attacked the war-displaced at Cyisaro. In Mutara, they attacked Rwebaie, Rwensheke, and Nyagahita. They shelled Nyagatare with heavy artillery. The fighting continued on 9 February, mainly in Ruhengeri, where the Rwandan Armed forces are still fighting back the rebels, and trying to liberate areas the rebels are still occupying in Ruhengeri town.

For internal security to return to the country, I feel that we need to do the following: We must uphold the rule of law in our country until the laws are changed. The laws must be applied equally to everyone. Parties must stop interfering with the leadership institutions by using them to do whatever they want to achieve, contrary to the interests of the people. Although we are in a transitional period, the leadership organs, each according to its powers, must be respected until they are changed. Those in charge of them must be respected until they are replaced.

Regarding the leadership at the communal level, I asked for elections so that the people could choose their leaders. I was told this was not possible. Since there are communes which no longer have leaders or whose leaders are being criticized, thus jeopardizing the security of these communes, I requested the prime minister, in collaboration with the minister of interior, to bring me without delay a proposal on how he feels those leaders can be replaced and by whom they can be replaced, before the Council of Ministers discusses the matter.

It would not be appropriate for communes to operate without leaders at this time of insecurity. It would not be appropriate at this time for communes to continue to be without leaders or for leaders to be removed without being replaced immediately. We could not be assured that security will be upheld. The government must empower the grassroots leadership, especially at the administrative unit level. It is easy to maintain security when the leadership is close to the people. The parties must desist from the current culture of setting the people against each other.

Concerning security along the country’s borders, particularly now that the rebels have resumed fighting, as I said earlier, the Government of Rwanda has resolved to continue talks with the RPF rebels, and even to share power, because that is what they have wanted all along, so that this war that is shedding the blood of Rwandans and displacing many can come to an end.

Although a Rwandan delegation was sent to Arusha, Tanzania to hold talks with the RPF [Rwandan Patriotic Front], this did not deter the latter from attacking. I once again declare that I fully support the negotiations, provided they are not conducted with hypocrisy or treason, that they do not give impossible conditions, and that they truly appear to be working for a peaceful solution for Rwanda. Thus, the method of war chosen by the rebels, and which they still apply, is not a good one. The RPF must stop fighting so that we can continue with the negotiations. The RPF must return to the positions they held when we signed the cease-fire agreement.

The military observer team charged with monitoring the cease-fire know the RPF positions and have them on their maps. I thus request all the citizens to continue supporting the Arusha talks so that they can effectively achieve peace in our country.

Rwandan men and women: At this time of war, we cannot continue working the same way as in peace time, that is why I ask that political party rallies be temporarily stopped throughout the country and be replaced by prefects and mayors’ meetings aimed at explaining security matters to the people. Security meetings at prefectural level must closely study the state of security and take appropriate steps in every area, be it instituting a curfew or patrols. I hope that if all of us Rwandans unite, and if the political parties make their contributions in conformity with the times we are living in, we will come out of these bad moments successfully. However, I request the friendly countries, organizations, the international community, and all our neighbors to understand our problems properly, and our wish to overcome them.

We must all agree that leadership must not come by way of war or bloodshed, and that the good way of democracy we have adopted of accepting that leadership is given by the people must be the only one we can apply to avoid destroying our own country.

Rwandan men and women: We all hope that negotiations will continue and will enable us to reach actual peace. Friends will help us in this and God will not forget us. Let Rwandans believe in their Army and continue to assist it openly. Long live all of you.

